 in the first centuries of the Christian Era, when the Faithful were bitterly persecuted, sacred rites were decreed to commemorate the martyrs until, as St. Augustine writes, “the solemn functions of the feast days of the martyrs were themselves exhortations to martyrdom” (Ser. 47, in Sanc#.). The

Page 262

    230 : THE REIGN OF CHRIST liturgical honors that later were bestowed on Confessors, Virgins, and Widows served marvelously to arouse in the Faithful that love of virtue which is also necessary in the days when the Church is at peace. Especially were feast days created to honor the Blessed Virgin so that the Christian people might not only venerate with greater piety the Mother of God, the proteétress of the Christ Child, but also be impelled towards a stronger love for her whom Our Redeemer in his last testament left to us as our Heavenly Mother. Amongst the many benefits gained from this public veneration of the Mother of God and of the Saints, not the least is that through this cult the Church, in all ages, has succeeded in rooting out the plague of heresy and error. In this Divine order we must admire the designs of Providence which draws good out of evil. In spite of a weakening of both the faith and the piety of people from time to time, and the spread of error, Catholic truth, supported by Divine Providence shone forth in spite of all opposition in new splendor and men being awakened from their spiritual lethargy aim to achieve greater and holier objectives. As a matter of fact, the feasts that occur during the course of the liturgical year which have been instituted in our own times, had the self-same origin and produced similar effects. Thus when respect for and the worship of the MoSt Blessed Sacrament grew weak, the Feast of Corpus Christi was instituted, and was ordered to be celebrated in such a manner that the solemn proces 

Page 263

    re or ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 231 sions and prayers recited during the octave would recall people to their duty of publicly venerating Our Lord. When because of the forbidding rigorisms of Jansenism the souls of men had grown weak and they had lost heart the feast of the Sacred Heart of Jesus was instituted so that their frigidity might be thawed out and they reclaimed by the love of God and the promise of everlasting Strength. Now when We, therefore, command that Christ Our King be venerated by Catholics throughout the world, We are providing for the special needs of Our own day a very effective remedy against the pests which pervade human society. The plague of our age is what is called laicism, with all its attendant errors and impious motives. You know, Venerable Brothers, that such impiety does not grow up over-night. For a long time it has been eating its way into the very vitals of society. As a matter of faét, the rule of Christ over mankind has been denied, the Church has been refused the right which comes from the very law of Jesus Christ to teach all peoples, to make her own laws for the spiritual government of her subjects in order to bring them to eternal happiness. Little by little the Christian religion has been made the equal of other and false religions and has been lowered to their level. The Catholic religion was made subject to the civil power and was practically abandoned to the control of rulers and magistrates. This error even went Still further; an attempt was made to substitute a certain

Page 264

    2222. THE REIGN OF CHRIST vague natural religion for the truth of the religion of Christ. There were not wanting governments which imagined they could do without God and cover up their lack of religion by irreligion and disrespect for God Himself. We have already written in sorrow in Our Encyclical Ubi Arcano of the evil effeéts of this abandonment of Christ on the part both of individuals and of nations. Today as well We grieve over these things, over the seeds of discord apparently sown everywhere, the rekindling of hatreds and rivalries between peoples which prevent the re-establishment of peace; We grieve over the unrestrained passions, so often hidden under the mask of the public good and love of country; the civil discords which arise from this source together with that blind unmeasured egotism that is so widely diffused which, thinking only of one’s own private good and welfare, measures all things by this false rule; over domestic peace grievously disturbed because of forgetfulness and the wilful disregard of family duties; over the natural unity and Stability of the family broken, and last of all, over society itself shaken to its foundations and plunging headlong to ruin. LEADING SOCIETY BACK TO CHRIST In spite of all this We are sustained by the holy hope that the Feast of Christ Our King which will be celebrated hereafter every year will at last lead back society to Our Blessed Saviour, an end which all men devoutly

Page 265

    , a SE CUS eae ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 233 look forward to. To hasten this return to Chris by means of good works and organized social action is a duty incumbent on every Catholic, of many of whom it can be said truthfully, that neither positions nor authority in civic life have been accorded as would be fitting to those who carry before them the torch of Truth. This condition perhaps is due to the apathy or the timidity of the good who abstain from strife and are apt to resist only too weakly. From our weakness the enemies of the Church are emboldened to greater and more fearless a¢ts of audacity. But when the Faithful clearly understand that they must fight with courage, always under the banner of Christ Our King, they will then Study with the zeal of Apostles how best to lead rebellious and ignorant people back to God. At the same time they will themselves acquire strength to keep inviolate God’s holy laws. Certainly it appears to Us that an annual celebration of the Feast of Christ Our King will greatly assist all nations towards a condemnation of, and a reparation for, those public apostasies which Jaicism with so much harm to society has begotten. In fact the more the dear name of Our Redeemer is passed over in shameful silence, be it at international meetings, be it in parliaments, so much the more necessary is it to acclaim Him as King and announce everywhere the rights of His royal dignity and power. All indeed can see that since the end of the last century, the way was being prepared for the long desired

Page 266

    234 ‘ THE REIGN OF CHRIST institution of this new feast day. No one can be ignorant of how this cult was spread and defended in books written in all the languages of the civilized world. The supremacy of the Kingdom of Christ was also recognized in the pious practice of all those who dedicated, even consecrated, their families to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. And not only families but even whole nations and kingdoms were likewise consecrated; finally, because of the desire of Leo XIII, the whole human race, during the Holy Year of 1900, was solemnly consecrated to the Divine Heart. Neither should it be passed over in silence that the great number of Eucharistic Congresses, held especially in our own times, marvelously assisted in solidifying this royal power of Christ over mankind. These Congresses by calling upon each of the Faithful in every diocese, State, and nation, as well as in the whole Catholic world, to venerate and adore Jesus Christ hidden under the veils of the Eucharist and also by means of public discourses and sermons, of public Exposition of the Blessed Sacrament, and of wonderful processions, aim to acknowledge and proclaim the Kingship of Christ which was bestowed upon Him by heaven itself. Thus it can be said most truly that the Christian people, inspired by the grace of God, take from the silence and darkness of our sacred temples to carry in triumph through the pub-_ lic Streets that self-same Jesus, and thus aid to re-establish Him in His royal rights, Him whom on His entrance into this world unjust men refused to recognize.

Page 267

    ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 235 TRIUMPHS OF CHRIST SHOWN This Holy Year now drawing to a close appears to be a most propitious occasion in which to effect therefore Our holy purpose of which We have been writing, since God manifestly blessed this Jubilee by raising the minds and hearts of the Faithful to thoughts of heavenly things which surpass all joy, by bringing them back to His grace, by confirming them in His holy way, and by leading them to the attainment of spiritual perfection. Therefore, when We consider the innumerable petitions addressed to Us as well as the events of the Holy Year, We think that the day has finally arrived to announce that all mankind should honor Christ the King at a special feast. In this year, as We said at the beginning, Our Divine King, admirable in His Saints, has been magnified in a truly marvelous way by the elevation of a new band of His faithful followers to the honors of the altar. During this same year, all people have been led to admire by means of the Missionary Exposition the triumphs of Christ gained by the saintly missionaries who have extended His Kingdom here on earth. Finally, We also celebrated this year the Centenary of the Council of Nicea and thus commemorated the definition of the dogma of the consubStantiality of the Word made Flesh with the Father, a dogma upon which is founded the truth of the sovereign rule of the same Christ over all peoples. Therefore, in virtue of Our Apostolic authority, We

Page 268

    236 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST institute the Feast of Our Lord Jesus Christ King, and decree that it be celebrated everywhere on the last Sunday of October, that is, on the Sunday preceding the Feast of All Saints. Likewise We decree that on this very same day, annually, there is to be renewed the consecration of all mankind to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, an act of consecration which Our Predecessor of holy memory, Pius X, had previously commanded to be done every year. But this year We wish the consecration to take place on the Thirty-first of this month, on which occasion We Ourselves will celebrate solemn Pontifical Mass in honor of Christ the King. At that time the consecration to the Sacred Heart shall be made in Our presence. Moreover, it seems to Us that it would be impossible otherwise to close and crown this Holy Year in a more worthy and opportune manner or to render the full meed of our gratitude and of that of all Catholics to Christ, Eternal King of the Ages, for the benefits conferred upon us, the Church, and the whole Catholic world during the Holy Year just ended. There is no need, Venerable Brothers, for us to explain at great length to you why We instituted the Feast of Christ the King as a distinét feast despite the fact that the royal dignity of Christ appears to be already amply recognized, at least by implication, in other feasts already _ decreed. It is enough, We believe, to tell you that although the material objeét of all these feasts of Our Lord is Christ, the formal objeét is quite distinct from that of

Page 269

    ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 237 the new feast which expressly recognizes by name both the royalty and kingly power of Christ. The reason, moreover, why We decreed that this feast should be celebrated on a Sunday is because that day would give both to the clergy in the celebration of Mass and the recitation of the Divine Office, and to the laity, free from their daily occupations, an opportunity to render a special public aét of obedience and devotion to Our Lord. Moreover, the last Sunday of October, when the close of the liturgical year is at hand, seemed to Us a moést fitting time to order this celebration for the reason that it will so happen that the mySteries of the life of Jesus Christ commemorated during the year will then terminate and be crowned, as it were, by this great solemnity of Christ, the King, thus exalting before all men the glory of Him who triumphs in His Saints and in His eleét. Therefore, We desire that it should be your office, your special task, Venerable Brothers, to see to it that a course of sermons is preached every year on fixed days in every parish for the celebration of this feast so that the Faithful, inStructed fully in the nature, meaning, and importance of the feast, shall be brought to lead lives altogether worthy of those who claim to be loving and faithful subjects of the Divine King. BENEFITS EXPECTED As We close this letter, Venerable Brothers, it is Our great pleasure to point out briefly what advantages for

Page 270

    238 THE REIGN OF CHRIST the Church, for society, and for each Chriftian We hope will flow from this public cult of Christ, the King. In the first place, the very fact of Our acknowledging publicly these royal honors which belong to Our Lord, must of itself recall to our minds that the Church which was eStablished by Christ as a perfect society cannot but demand as her right, a right which she cannot renounce, full liberty and independence from the civil power. Moreover, the Church, in the exercise of her divine ministry of teaching, ruling and guiding to eternal happiness all who belong to the Kingdom of Christ, manifestly cannot depend on the will of others. The civil power, too, must allow to religious orders and sodalities of both sexes the exercise of a like liberty since they, over and above being a help to the Church and her pastors, also codperate greatly in the extension and development of the Kingdom of Christ, either because by their profession of the three religious vows they fight against the threefold concupiscence of the world or because by their leading a life of great perfection they show forth daily to all men that holiness which the Divine Founder of the Church foretold would be one of the marks of the true Church. The annual celebration of this feast will also become a means of recalling to the nations their duty of publicly — worshipping Christ, that to render Him obedience is not only the duty of private individuals but of rulers and governments as well. It will recall to them also that at

Page 271

    ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 239 the final judgment the Christ who has been ignored, despised, and even driven from our midst, will revenge Himself for all the injuries He has received. His royal dignity demands that society as a whole should conform itself to the commandments of God and to the principles of the Christian life, first by the stabilization of its laws, then in the administration of justice, and above all things in preparing the souls of our young people for the acceptance of sound doétrine and the leading of holy lives. Finally, who can compute the power and holiness which the Faithful will obtain from meditating on these things, if they do so with the object of modelling themselves on the true Standards of the Christian life? Now because Christ Our Lord has been given all power in heaven and on earth, because all men redeemed by His Precious Blood have been made His subjects by a new and wondrous title of authority, because, lastly, this power of His extends to all mankind, it does not follow that we lose our liberty by reason of this rule of Christ over us. For it is necessary that Our Lord should rule over the mind of man, who by his intellectual submission shall firmly and at all times assent to the revealed truth and doétrines of Christ; that He rule over the will, which shall obey the divine laws and commands; that He rule over our hearts, which despising mere natural love shall love God above all things and be united to Him alone; that He rule over our bodies which as instruments, or as St. Paul says as “‘inStruments of justice to God”

Page 272

    es “2 PA “eay Sate a 240 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST (Rom. vi, 13) will promote the sanctity of the soul. If all these things are preached to the Faithful they undoubtedly will the more easily be led towards perfection. May the Lord grant, Venerable Brothers, that the many too outside His Kingdom shall long for and accept the sweet yoke of Christ, and that all men who are His subjects and His children, and their number indeed is great, shall through His mercy bear this yoke not because they are forced to do so, but with pleasure, with love, and in the spirit of holiness. Thus if our lives are made conformable to the laws of this Divine Kingdom we shall gather abundant fruit therein, and when called by Christ as good and faithful servants we too shall become sharers with Him in the Heavenly Kingdom of His everlasting happiness and glory. And on the anniversary of the Birth of Our Lord Jesus Christ this great gift We desire for you, Venerable Brothers, as the expression of Our fatherly affection. We impart, too, from the depths of Our heart, to you, Venerable Brothers, and to all your clergy and people, the Apostolic Blessing, a pledge of divine favors to come. Given at Rome, at St. Peter’s, on the Eleventh Day of December of the Holy Year, 1925, the fourth of Our Pontificate. ee Pore, Pius XI.

Page 273

    The text on this page is estimated to be only 43.00% accurate
    “SACRED HEART as au Reedy?

Page 274

Page 275

    . ee THE REPARATION DUE TO THE SACRED HEART * PIUS XI VENERABLE BROTHERS, GREETINGS AND APOSTOLIC BENEDICTION UR most merciful Redeemer, having assured () the salvation of the human race by His death on the Cross, before He ascended to His Heavenly Father, said these consoling words to His sorrowing Apostles and disciples: “Behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the world” (Matt. XXVili, 20). These happy words are also Our own source of hope and salvation, words which, Venerable Brothers, come readily to mind every time when, from this high watchtower, as it were, We look down upon the human family afflicted by so many grevious ills, and upon the Church, assailed without respite by attacks and plots. As a matter of fact, this promise of Our Divine Lord, as it once upon a time raised high the fallen spirits of the * Translated by Msgr. James H. Ryan, D.D., Ph.D.; copyrighted by the N. C. W. C. News Service. 243

Page 276

    244 THE REIGN OF CHRIST Apostles and urged them on to spread most zealously the a seed of the Gospel through all the earth, so also it has guided the Church to victory over the powers of Hell. Assuredly, Our Lord Jesus Christ has always assisted His Church; and most powerfully and effectively on those very occasions when she was encompassed by the greatest dangers and calamities. Christ then bestowed on her precisely those helps most necessary to meet the conditions of the times, by His wisdom which “reacheth from end to end mightily and ordereth all things sweetly” (Wisdom viii, 1). Nor in our own times has “‘the hand of the Lord been shortened” (Isaias lix, 1), especially on such occasions when an erroneous doétrine is being taught and spread about throughout the world, and by reason of which we fear that the sources of the Christian life may be dried up, for by such errors men are led to forsake the Christian life and the love of God. OBLIGATION TO MAKE AMENDS Since some Christians, perhaps, are ignorant of, and others are indifferent to, the sorrows which the most loving Jesus revealed to St. Margaret Mary Alacoque in His apparitions to her, as well as His wishes and desires which He manifested to mankind, all of which in the last analysis work to man’s advantage, it is Our pleasure, Venerable Brothers, to write you at some length of the obligation which rests upon all to make those

Page 277

    = iia =. ~ ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 245 amends which we owe to the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus. We feel certain that each of you will zealously teach to your own flocks what We herein write and that you will exhort them to do all that We wish to be done. From among all the proofs of the infinite goodness of Our Saviour none stands out more prominently than the fact that, as the love of the Faithful grew cold, He, Divine Love Itself, gave Himself to us to be honored by a very special devotion and that the rich treasury of the Church was thrown wide open in the interests of that devotion by which we honor the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus “in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge”’ (Col. ii, 3). As formerly Divine Goodness wished to exhibit to the human race, as it came from the Ark of Noe, a sign of the renewed covenant between them, “my bow which appears in the clouds” (Gen. ix, 14), so in our own so troubled times, while that heresy held sway which is known as Jansenism, the most insidious of all heresies, enemy of the love of God and of filial affection for Him—for this heresy preached that God was not so much to be loved by us as a Father as to be feared as an unrelenting Judge—the most kind Jesus manifested to the nations His Sacred Heart, unfolding our banner of peace and love to the breeze, an augury of certain victory in the battle before us. Wherefor Our Predecessor, Leo XIII, admiring as he did the great possibilities which devotion to the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus contains, with reason wrote in his

Page 278

    246 THE REIGN OF CHRIST Encyclical Annum Sacrum: “Just as when the newlyborn Church lay helpless under the yoke of the Czsars, there appeared in the heavens a cross, at once the sign and cause of the marvelous victory which was soon to follow,” so today behold before our very eyes there appears another most happy and holy sign, the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus, crowned by a brilliant cross set among raging flames. In this Sacred Heart we should place all our hopes, from it, too, we ask and await salvation. DEVOTION TO SACRED HEART PRAISED Are we not to see, Venerable Brothers, in that blessed sign and in the devotion which flows from it, the very substance of our holy religion, as well as the rules to guide us toward a more perfect form of life, since the Sacred Heart is the road which will most surely lead us to know intimately Jesus Christ and will cause our hearts to love more tenderly and to imitate Him more generously than we have heretofore done? Since this is so, it is no wonder then that Our Predecessors have always defended this most praiseworthy devotion to the Sacred Heart from the objections launched by those who will not accept it, that they have praised it most highly and have always promoted it with the greatest possible zeal in so far as the conditions of time and place seemed to demand such a¢tion. Certainly, it is due to nothing

Page 279

    ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 247 short of the inspiration of God that the childlike love of the Faithful for the Sacred Heart increases day by day; that pious associations to promote devotion to the Sacred Heart have come into being everywhere, and that the custom has become quite common of receiving Holy Communion on the First Friday of the month, a custom which had its origin in the wish of Jesus Christ Himself. Among the different praétices which directly accompany devotion to the Most Sacred Heart assuredly the foremost is the aét of consecration by which we offer to the Heart of Jesus both ourselves and all that belongs to us, recognizing that all we have comes to us from the infinite charity of God. Our Lord, having revealed to that moSst pure lover of His Sacred Heart, St. Margaret Mary, how much more He insisted on the immense love which He has borne toward us than on His rights over us, asked that mankind pay Him this tribute of devotion. Therefore the Saint herself, together with her Spiritual Director, Claude de la Colombiére, first of all offered Him an act of consecration. In the course of time individuals began paying Him the same tribute, then whole families and certain associations, and last of all, public officials, the inhabitants of cities, and whole nations. Due to the machinations of wicked persons, both in the century just ended and in this century, things had come to such a pass that men despised the rule of Christ and publicly declared war upon His Church by means of laws and popular enactments contrary to both the Divine

Page 280

    246." THE REIGN OF CHRIST and natural law, even going so far as to cry out publicly: “We will not have this man to reign over us” (Luke xix, 14). But by this act of consecration there burst forth, in startling contrast to these cries, the unanimous voice of the lovers of the Sacred Heart, rising to vindicate the ‘glory and defend the rights of the same Sacred Heart, “for he must reign” (I Cor. xv, 25) “may Thy Kingdom come.” Finally, at the beginning of the century as a happy consequence of all this, the whole human race which belongs by inherent right to Christ, “in whom all things are reéStablished” (Eph. i, 10), was consecrated to His Most Sacred Heart by Our Predecessor then happily reigning, Leo XIII, amid the applause of the whole Christian world. FEAST OF CHRIST THE KING INSTITUTED These auspicious and happy beginnings We Ourselves, through the great goodness of God, brought to completion, as was pointed out in Our Encyclical Quas Primas, on the occasion when, acceding to the desires and wishes expressed by numerous bishops and the Faithful, We instituted at the close of the Jubilee Year the Feast of Christ the King of all men, which feast We ordered to be celebrated solemnly all over the Christian world. By that act We not only brought forth clearly into the light of day the fact of the supreme dominion of Christ over all things, over civil society and the home, as well as over individuals; We also experienced beforehand the %

Page 281

    Pe Pee ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 249 joy of that most happy day when the whole world will submit joyfully and willingly to the sweet yoke of Christ the King. Wherefore We commanded that, together with the celebration of this feast, there should be renewed annually the aét of consecration, and this We did in order to obtain more surely and in greater quantities the fruits of such a consecration and to bind with Christian love in the communion of peace all peoples to the heart of the King of Kings and Sovereign of Sovereigns. Moreover, to all these expressions of veneration, and especially to that most fruitful one, the aét of consecration, which by means of the institution of the Feast of Christ the King has been, as it were, again confirmed, it is expedient that another be added, and of this last, Venerable Brothers, We wish to speak now somewhat at length. We refer to the act of expiation or of reparation, as it is called, to be made to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. DUTY OF REPARATION IMPOSED If in the act of consecration the intention to exchange, as it were, for the love of the Creator the love of us creatures Stands out most prominently, there follows almost naturally from this another fact, namely, that if this same Uncreated Love has either been passed over through forgetfulness or saddened by reason of our sins, then we should repair such outrages, no matter in what manner they have occurred. Ordinarily, we call this duty,

Page 282

    250 : THE REIGN OF CHRIST reparation. If we are held to both these duties for the same reasons, we are held to the duty of making reparation by the most powerful motives of justice and of love of justice, in order to expiate the injury done God by our sins and to reéStablish, by means of penance, the Divine order which has been violated; and of love, in order to suffer together with Christ, patient and covered with opprobrium, so that we may bring to Him, in so far as our human weakness permits, some comfort in His: sufferings. Since we are all sinners, burdened with many offenses, we should honor God. This should take place not only by means of that cult by which we adore, in the veneration due Him from us, His Infinite Majesty, or by means of prayer when we recognize His supreme dominion over us, or by acts of thanksgiving when we praise His infinite generosity toward us; it is necessary to do more than all this. We must also satisfy the just anger of God because of “the numberless sins, offenses, and negligences” which we have committed. Therefore, we must add to the