 sovereignty such as He was accused of conspiring to eStablish in opposition to Caesar’s rule. Secondly, it is not “from hence.” It is not acquired by political intrigue or military uprising, but is set up by God. ‘The God of Heaven,” wrote Daniel the Prophet, “will set up a Kingdom that shall never be destroyed.”

Page 94

    72 oe THE REIGN OF CHRIST (Dan. ii, 44.) This sufficed to refute the charges on which, out of fear of the Jews, Pilate ordered Christ to be put to death; and it suffices for us. Yet, though Christ’s Kingdom is “‘not of this world,” and “not from hence,” He Himself, as King of kings and Lord of lords, is truly King no less over all temporal rulers and governments, than over His spiritual Kingdom, the Church. He merely did not wish, as we have said, to exercise this power in an earthly way. “All power,” He Himself clearly tells us, “is given Me in heaven and on earth.” (Matt. xxviii, 15.) There is no exception made by Him.

Page 95

    THE CROWN OF THORNS 4. THE BLOODY CROWNING OF OUR KING Pilate first delivered Christ to be “chastised.” Never in history was king clad in purple like to that which covered the royal Person of Our King in the fearful agony of the scourging. A. worm and no man! He had taken our iniquities upon Him and bore in His Body the Stripes due to our sins. From a thousand channels, opened by the cutting, tearing, lacerating scourges, the Sacred Blood poured forth and mercifully robed Him in the only royal mantle ever worn by Him. But word of the Kingship of Christ had already reached the coarse Roman soldiers. It appealed to their barrack-room sense of humor. “King of the Jews!” A despised King of the most despised nation, rejected by His own people, and delivered utterly helpless into their hands. The pure Son of Mary, perfect in His human nature, and so also most susceptible to every form of pain— what a Victim for their brutal jests! They would see to it that He should not lack any royal ceremony. Nothing should be wanting to His coronation. 73

Page 96

    74 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST What now followed was a mockery inexpressibly painful in the physical sufferings it entailed; infinitely humiliating in the indignities, outrages and contempt it implied; utterly crushing in the callous debasement of the Divine royalty of the Saviour King. It was Satan’s fitting revenge, put in the minds of these men, for Christ’s refusal to accept the visionary crown of world empire offered on that solitary mountain top. Another crown was now awaiting Him, not, alas! visionary, but only too real. Yet this crown Christ, in His Divine foreknowledge, had already accepted willingly, gladly, and of His own free consent—out of love for us. Between the scourging and Christ’s renewed summons by Pilate there was Still abundant time for the soldiers to work out their will with Him, as Hell itself might instigate. The scene which thus took place is of vast significance in the history of humanity. It was the world’s own coronation of its King, completed by His elevation to the throne of the Cross. There, as He foretold, He would thereafter draw all things to Himself. But for the present a¢t of coronation, too, a throne had first to be procured—a battered relic, it may be, drawn from some dusty barrack heap, where the ragged cloak of scarlet may also have been found to be cast for a royal mantle about the bloody shoulders of the King. With cruel forethought and diabolic ingenuity a crown

Page 97

    THE CROWN OF THORNS 5 of thorns had meantime been platted, and all was ready for the mock ceremony. With an agony of pain unthinkable the keen, piercing thorns, reddened with the Sacred Blood, thrust their points deep and deeper into the forehead and delicate, sensitive temples of the Son of God, until His whole head was circled with a torment as of flame. Then, with mail-clad hands they pressed down Still more firmly upon that wreath of anguish, to make perfect to its last detail this dreadful a¢ét of coronation. So, forever, the world should remember the Visage of its thorn-crowned King. Here mankind would learn its lessons of the vanity of all earthly honors. Here the saints would draw new strength to welcome with delight, suffering, humiliation, contempt and death itself for love of Him. But one thing still was wanting. A scepter must be given to the King. Into His bound hands a soldier thrust the long, gaunt reed that he had cut for this purpose. All was now completed, and in boisterous homage the entire band fell down upon their knees, and bent their foreheads before the royal Presence of the King, thus enthroned, crowned, and sceptered at their hands: “And bowing the knee before Him, they mocked Him, saying: ‘Hail, King of the Jews!’ ” Nothing further was needed except to bring Him also their loyal tribute. This was to be plentifully given Him. Their prostrations completed, the soldiers leaped up from

Page 98

    76 ‘ THE REIGN OF CHRIST their places and “‘spitting upon Him, they took the reed and struck His head.” (Matt. xxvii, 27-30.) Into His face they vented the vile spittle of their foul mouths. That was their tribute to the King. And Still more was given Him in the cruel blows they hailed upon His head. Taking the reeden scepter out of His hands they struck down with it upon the crown of thorns, scoffing and jeering in their rude mirth to see His whole sensitive frame wince and shudder at each agonizing blow. From a hundred burning wounds the Precious Blood flowed forth anew with every Stroke, blinding the Divine eyes, running in Streams or tricklets over the bruised cheeks, clotting the torn hair and beard, and washing away, it may be, in this ablution, some of the terrible defilement which at various times had been voided from the mouths of the servants and soldiers, and even of the priests in the Sanhedrin itself on that Holy of Holies, the Sacred Face of Christ the King. Well might the Prophet write when in vision, centuries before, he looked upon that Divine Countenance: “There is no beauty in Him nor comeliness; and we have seen Him, and there was no sightliness that we should be desirous of Him. Despised and the most abject of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with infirmity; and His look as it were hidden and despised, whereupon we esteemed Him not. Surely He hath borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows, and we thought

Page 99

    THE CROWN OF THORNS TL, Him as it were a leper, and as one struck by God and afflicted. But He was wounded for our iniquities, He was bruised for our sins, the chastisement of our peace was upon Him, and by His bruises we are healed.” (Isaias lit, 2-5.) For us too, as for Theresa of the Child Jesus and the Holy Face, these words may well be the subject of a life study, and can by God’s grace become the foundation of a holiness, true, solid, tender and exalted, making us, with her, most like to Christ.

Page 100

Page 101

    RY Lo oy

Page 102

Page 103

    CHRIST IN HIS KINGDOM TRIUMPHANT Fra Angelico

Page 104

Page 105

    eNO, etd. it | parse THE KING OF GLORY 1. THE STANDARD OF THE KING \ X tg have followed our King along the path of His humiliation, we shall ascend with Him now in the triumph of His glory and witness in particular His glorification through the Cross. In the mind of the Church the debasement of Christ wonderfully blends into His exaltation. The Cross becomes His Throne. It is all precisely as He had predicted, that when lifted up He would draw all things to Himself. The punishment of the crucifixion, as is well known, with the painful and humiliating scourging that ordinarily accompanied it, was the extreme penalty inflicted upon slaves. By their very State they were already regarded as deprived of every last vestige of human dignity. Before the Roman law they were excluded from every human consideration, being classed pro nullis, pro mortuis, pro quadrupedibus—as nothing, dead, and legally ranked with the four-footed beasts. Yet at the price of a slave Christ had willed to be sold, and the death of the most criminal and hapless of slaves He freely accepted for love of us. 81

Page 106

    82 ‘ ‘THE REIGN OF CHRIST We might well be moved to wonder, therefore, that the Church’s most distinétive song of the Crucifixion should be a hymn of jubilant triumph more than of any other sentiment. For all the feasts of the Holy Cross, as also during Passion Week, and particularly at the Good Friday procession, when the Blessed Sacrament is borne from its Repository to the main altar, the special song of the Church is ever the exultant Vexilla Regis, the echoes of which continue to ring vibrantly through the entire Paschal liturgy as well. “The standards of the King advance, Bright shines the Cross’ mystery.” The vexillum was the old Roman cavalry standard, not a banner, as it is frequently translated to suit our modern conventions. On it, in the days of Constantine, the proud Roman eagle, with wings outstretched to conquer the world, gave place to the victorious Cross of Christ. It would have been difficult for the ecclesiastical poet to have found any image by which to signalize more Strikingly the triumph of Christ on the gibbet of shame, than precisely this allusion to the exaltation of the Cross on the Roman standard, supplanting there the ancient — emblem of all the wealth and power of Imperiall Rome— the eagle of Jove lowered before the Cross of the Galilean! It symbolized in a single phrase the triumph of Christianity over paganism.

Page 107

    THE KING OF GLORY 83 Perhaps, then, it may not be out of place here to recall the occasion itself for which the Vexilla Regis was originally composed, as still further illustrating that thought of Christ’s victory through the Cross. The date was November 19, in the year 569. At the request of St. Radegunda a particle of the true Cross was being sent by the Emperor Justin II to her MonaStery of the Holy Cross, at Poictiers. In a splendid triumphal procession, amid all the Iavishness of imperial magnificence, with princes and bishops in attendance, the sacred relic was solemnly borne from Tours to its deStination, while the sublime processional! of the Vexilla Regis rang out for the first time, thrilling the hearts of men and arousing in them those same emotions that Still are produced in us after thirteen centuries. What particularly lifts up our souls in this song is the thought of Christ conquering, Christ reigning through the Cross. The royalty, power and glory of Christ on that instrument of shame and death are Stressed with particular force in the lines of this hymn that are based on the famous tenth verse of the ninetyfifth Psalm. The Poet, Venantius Fortunatus, thus alludes to the words of royal David: “That which the Prophet King of old Hath in mysterious verse foretold Is now acknowledged, whilst we see God ruling nations from the Tree.”

Page 108

    es 84 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST The words a ligno, rendered here “from the Tree,” are now held not to have been in the original Scripture text, but to have been merely a marginal gloss of some scribe which found its way into the text. Yet this, evidently, cannot affect their really deep truth and beauty. They won great favor with the early Fathers, and the Church, by incorporating them into her Paschal liturgy, has made them permanently her own. At every Commemoration of the Cross, during all that season, the priest Still exclaims with the exultant Mother of the Faithful: “Proclaim it unto the nations, alleluia! That the Lord reigneth from the Cross, alleluia!” Even in the eyes of the world the sign of contempt has become the emblem of the highest honors. Men fasten it as their most precious distinétion on the breast of the conquering hero. The rude, rough cross of sufferings, hardships, or perils, heroically borne in some great cause, is thus converted into the golden symbol of merit and victory. In some such way Christ Himself will be honored on the Last Day, when the Sign of the Son of Man will appear in the heavens to herald His coming in glory to judge all mankind. Once more we have here that purposeful blending, now by the Divine Wisdom Itself, of the recollection of

Page 109

    THE KING OF GLORY 85 past humiliation with present exaltation. That Sign of the Son of Man, to which the Sacred Scriptures refer in the description of the future Judgment, is the Vexillum Regis, the Cross of Christ, the Standard of the King, which then will shine forth in splendor when all the tribes of the earth shall be gathered at the coming of the Son of Man, in the clouds of heaven, with great power and majesty. Here, then, is the important lesson, the practical truth so intensely grasped by the saints, so Strongly insisted on in particular by St. Ignatius in the Spiritual Exercises—that if we would participate with our King in glory we must share with Him first in His Cross. The measure of our participation in His trials, labors, weariness, suffering, and even ignominy, outrages and death itself, undergone by us for the love of Him, will be the measure of our share in His glory.

Page 110

Page 111

    THE KING OF GLORY 2. TREE OF SHAME AND THRONE OF GLORY During His whole mortal life, as we have seen, Our Divine Lord avoided all display of kingly power, clearly though He proclaimed the truth of His Kingship in the face of Jew and Gentile. But with His death on the Cross a new epoch began. In St. Paul’s letter to the Philippians occurs a passage which, as read in the Latin Vulgate, consists of just twenty-five words, yet into these the Apostle has compressed a history of Christ, both in His earthly humiliation and His heavenly glory. St. Paul thus writes of the Divine Saviour: “He humbled Himself, becoming obedient unto death, even to the death of the Cross, for which cause God also hath exalted Him, and hath given Him a Name which is above all names.”’ (ii, 8, 9.) As the turning point of this brief but comprehensive life of Christ, as I may call it, central between His earthly and heavenly existence, as portrayed in these few but mighty words, we see the Cross. For this the Infinite Word of God humbled Himself, descending from the eternal Throne of His majesty, and 87

Page 112

    88 ‘ ‘THE REIGN OF CHRIST was made man of the Virgin Mary, that after long years of subjection and obedience, after trials and hardships of every kind, after sufferings and weariness endured for us, He might finally yield up His life on the Tree of Shame. But that “death of the Cross,” which was the culmination of His earthly humiliations, was also the prelude to His heavenly exaltation: “For which God hath exalted Him.” And St. Paull further tells us how the Father exalted Him: “That in the name of Jesus every knee should bow of those that are in heaven, on earth, and under the earth: and that every tongue should confess that the Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory of God the Father.” (Phil. ii, 10, 11.) How closely humiliation and glory touch each other! How they almost blend into one another! How intimately, as cause and effect, they are eternally related! How that very Cross, upon the border line between them, belongs equally, although under quite different aspeéts, to them both, the Cross of shame and the Cross of glory, © now darkened by the night of Calvary’s eclipse, and then flashing in the skies as the dead arise to judgment! What a thought for us to ponder on! What a consolation and a joy to all in affliction, suffering, trial or disgrace! So conceived, so understood, so borne in a spirit of Divine Love, how all the dark sorrowings of earth

Page 113

    " THE KING OF GLORY 89 are in a moment illuminated with the glory of another world, and eternal splendors lie about them! For the saints indeed Love alone sufficed—“to love, to be loved, to make Love loved.” That motive, so pithily expressed by St. Theresa of the Child Jesus, makes the Cross attractive even here below while the shadows of earth still enclose us and we live by faith. With what delicate and wistful affection this Little Singer of our day dwells on the sweetness of conformity to God’s Will! “My joy I find in pain and loss, I love the thorns that guard the rose, With joy I kiss each heavy cross, And smile with every tear that flows. “When clouds the sunny skies o’ercast, And weary grows my heart the while, My joy it is that joy is past, And gone my Lord’s consoling smile. “My peace is hid in Jesus’ breast: May His sweet will alone be done! What fear can mar my perfect rest, Who love the shadow as the sun? “Since Love’s divine, celestial breath Is all I need my heart to bless, What matters life, what matters death? Love is my peace, my happiness!”

Page 114

    i, Be ee r ‘ eer go : THE REIGN OF CHRIST There, in a few lines, is the whole Christian philosophy of the Cross, which is also the whole Christian philosophy of life, seen in all the beauty of its sublime perfection. It is the full, ripe, divine philosophy of St. Paul expressed by the lips of a child, but from a heart enamored of the Cross. And it was through that same Cross that the sweet singer of those lines, our own Little Flower, was in turn to be visibly glorified even here below as few men or women have ever been in the whole course of human history. In brief it is but another and most tangible illustration, because brought so near to us, of the glory that flows from the Cross, of the flower that blooms from the root deep hidden in the darkness of the earth. “Amen, amen, I say to you, unless the grain of wheat, falling into the ground, die, itself remaineth alone. But if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit.” (John xii, 24, 25.) And surely we all may hope to attain to this spirit of Divine Love by the grace of God in which we can always trust. And indeed why not? Since after all the most necessary things are the most common, as water, air and bread—but what, in the spiritual life, is more necessary for us than Divine Love? Yet let us well remember that its secrets are revealed only to the little ones and the humble of heart: ““Amen I say to you, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child, shall not enter into it.” (Mark x, 15.) It was from the mouth of little children that Our

Page 115

    THE KING OF GLORY gr Divine Lord, direétly before His Sacred Passion, received that demonstration of praise which most greatly pleased Him. In his Processional Hymn for Palm Sunday, Bishop Theodulf, who lived from about the year 760 to 821, makes of this event the refrain which links together, as with a chain of gold, all the successive Stanzas of his song that begins: All glory, laud and honor To Thee, Redeemer King, To whom the lips of children Made sweet hosannas ring. Thou art the King of Israel, Thou David’s royal Son, Who in the Lord’s Name comest, The kind and blessed One. So, too, we see from these and other far earlier passages how completely the truth of Christ’s Kingship was grasped during every century of the Church’s history. It is written large over the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and it could not but be equally important in the lives of the Faithful of every period. “Christ conquers, Christ reigns, Christ rules, King of kings, our King, our Hope!”

Page 116

    Great, crowned on Christmas Day in a year “800 . Pope Leo III, do we owe the expression of loyalty to — Christ, the Sovereign King of Kings, which like a~ spiritual battle cry has come down to us through the cen- _ turies: “Christ lives, Christ reigns, Christ triumphs!”

Page 117

    THE KING OF GLORY 3. THE PROPHET’S FIVE WORLD-EMPIRES But let us now Study in turn the contrast to all this. It is nowhere, so far as I am aware, presented with such overwhelming power, on a scale so vast, as in that symbol of the “great statue” divinely shown to the King of Babylon. King Nabuchodonosor, we remember, had dreamed a dream which left him terrified, but the substance of it he was not able to recall. In vain he summoned his diviners and the wise men of his kingdom, the magicians and Chaldeans. God alone could reveal to him the secret and its interpretation, and this He did through Daniel His Prophet: “Thou, O king, sawest, and behold there was as it were a great Statue: this Statue, which was great and high, tall of Stature, Stood before thee, and the look thereof was terrible. “The head of this statue was of fine gold, but the breast and the arms of silver, and the belly and the thighs of brass: and the legs of iron, the feet part of iron and part of clay. “Thus thou sawest, till a Stone was cut out of a moun93

Page 118

    94 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST tain without aid of hands: and it Struck the statue upon the feet thereof that were of iron and of clay, and broke them in pieces. “Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of a summer’s thrashing floor, and they were carried away by the wind: and there was no place found for them: but the stone that struck the statue, became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth.” (Dan. ii, 31-35-) The head of that Statue, Daniel explained, was the King himself, representing the mighty Babylonian Empire, the marvel of the world in Strength, and power, and glory, under whose sway were “all places wherein the children of men, and the beasts of the field dwell.” But after it should rise up another world-ruling kingdom, inferior to it, and so of silver, the Medo-Persian; which in turn would be followed by a third, of brass, the Greco-Macedonian. Finally special stress is laid upon the fourth, which is of iron. “‘As iron breaketh into pieces and subdueth all things, so shall that break and destroy all these.” (Dan. ii, 40.) Who can fail to recognize here the future, imperial, world-ruling, world-crushing power of pagan Rome? That identification is placed beyond all controversy by the minuteness of detail with which in another chapter the Prophet refers to it as: “The fourth kingdom upon earth, which shall be greater than all the kingdoms, and

Page 119

    THE KING OF GLORY 95 shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces.” (Dan. vii, 23.) There in unmistakable terms is foretold the iron rule of Imperial Rome, with the merciless march of its armies, the captives dragged at its chariot wheels, and its haughty vaunt: “Romans the lords of the earth!” But “in the days of those kingdoms,” that is in the days of the last of them, since the Prophet piétures them as ruling successively—in the days therefore of Imperial Rome—a fifth kingdom should be set up, entirely different in its nature from all the others, not human but divine in its origin, and consequently indestructible by all the arms and powers and wiles of men. For: “The God of heaven will set up a kingdom that shall never be destroyed and His kingdom shall not be delivered up to another people, and it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and itself shall stand forever.” (Dan. ii, 44.) That Kingdom, the Catholic Church, with Christ as its royal Head, is the Stone “cut out of the mountain without aid of hands,” which should smite on its feet of iron and clay the huge symbol of all worldly greatness and power, and shatter it to pieces. But that Stone itself, the Church, would become a mountain, filling all the earth. Babylon the great is gone. Gone are the mighty kingdoms which in turn succeeded it and held the empire of the world. Gone is the last of them, Imperial Rome, with all its pride and glory. Vanished are they all on

Page 120

    96 <THE REIGN OE CHRIST the wind, “‘like the chaff of a summer’s thrashing floor.” The Catholic Church alone continues in her imperishable existence, the fifth kingdom which the Prophet foresaw, the Kingdom of Christ on earth, universal and indestructible, the mountain which “filled the whole earth” and whose massive rock no seas can wear away and no lightnings shatter. Men might, conceivably, remove the Andes; they might level the cloud-capped Alps, but they Strive in vain against the mountain of God which covers the earth. Words can go no further to describe the massive Strength of that Church of Christ, its world-wide Catholicity and its indefectibility. “Itself shall Stand forever.” Enduring on earth, it shall come to its perfeétion in Heaven.

Page 121

    THE KING OF GLORY 4. THE KINGDOM WHICH GOD HAS SET UP The Kingdom of Christ, which has triumphed over the ancient paganism, is in this world, but not “‘of this world.” It is the Kingdom set up by the God of Heaven; the Stone cut out of the mountain. Those who are not members of this Kingdom are none the less subject to Christ’s universal dominion. “I am appointed by Him King over Sion,” Christ says, referring to the Eternal Father in the words the Prophet places on His lips. Over Sion, His holy Church, He rules today as its acknowledged Head. But immediately the Prophet makes clear that absolutely all else must also be included under His empire. ‘Ask of Me,” he represents the Father saying to the Messias King, “, . . and I will give Thee The Gentiles for Thy inheritance, And the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession.” (Ps. ii, 6-8.) All must ultimately acknowledge His authority—if not now, then hereafter; if not through love, then by compulsion, under a power they will not be able to 97

Page 122

    98 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST resist. “Thou shalt rule them with a rod of iron,” the same Psalmist adds, as we recall, ““And shalt break them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.” Only when all His enemies shall have been made His footstool, in the words of the inspired seer, shall the uninterrupted reign of His glory begin in Heaven. Of that period the Prophet Daniel gives us the picture, to which we have elsewhere referred. With the last enemy made subject to the power of our Divine King, we behold Christ, in the clouds of Heaven, approaching the Eternal Father, and thus is described for us that future scene of glory: “T beheld therefore in the vision of the night, and lo, one like the Son of Man came with the clouds of Heaven, and He came even to the Ancient of days: and they presented Him before Him. And He gave Him power, and glory, and a kingdom: and all peoples, tribes and tongues shall serve Him. His power is an everlasting power that shall not be taken away: and His Kingdom that shall not be destroyed.”” (Dan. vii, 13, 14.) Here for the first time occurs that title, ‘“‘the Son of Man,” in reference to the Messias, and it is from this very passage that the Messias King, on His public coming, at the period Daniel had minutely prediéted in another passage, applied this name to Himself. It indicates that then the Prophet aCtually saw the Word of God in the human nature He was to assume. But the Divine nature of the Messias King is no less made clear by

Page 123

    THE KING OF GLORY 99 His coming in the clouds of Heaven, a manner of appearance reserved in the Sacred Books to the Divinity exclusively. We must, however, rightly underStand this passage. It does not imply that now, with the final conquest of Christ’s enemies, the eternal Kingship was to be beStowed upon Him, as if He had not previously possessed this already. Rather it was now to be publicly confirmed, as we might say. Or else this solemn act may be underStood as intended worthily to mark His entrance upon that new and most glorious phase of His reign when all His enemies shall have been subdued forever. Then shall the words of the Psalmist be completely fulfilled describing Yahwe, the Eternal of Days, as He bids Christ the King sit at His right hand, “until I make Thy enemies Thy footstool.” (Ps. cix, 1.) To that same period St. Paul referred when he pictured Christ as presenting His Kingdom to God the Father after the end of the world and the completion of all things, when nothing whatsoever should be left that had not been entirely subjected to the Saviour’s sway