 Our duty lies in bringing home to our people this understanding, and particularly to our Catholic Students,

Page 64

    44 * THE REIGN OF CHRIST who are meant to assume positions of leadership in that spiritual army of Christ. In a word, we must produce an enlightened, alert generation of Catholics, not merely on the defensive and meekly apologetic for their Faith, but spiritually on the offensive. Should we find we have failed to instill into those who come under our own care and influence that spirit of zeal and apoStleship, that readiness for selfsacrifice and personal service in the cause of Christ, then, no matter what else we may have accomplished, we cannot but conclude that we have failed in the supreme task entrusted to us. Thus the Catholic teacher in the Catholic school may have given to his pupils their full and satisfactory secular education, but if he has fallen short of impressing on them also, most practically and profoundly, the spiritual purpose of their attainments he has missed the great end of his vocation. What holds true of the classroom is no less true of the home, the pulpit, the press, the platform, and every other even more universal means of reaching the public and setting before them the message of Christ the King. To have us mobilize to the utmost in His cause every available agency is the ardent desire of His Heart. He has come to cast fire upon the earth, and what would He but that it should burn? Needless to say, this spirit of the apostolate, which has flamed in the hearts of all God’s saints, is not confined to

Page 65

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 45 the public ministry, but has its place in the most hidden life and the most cloistered State. Who, for instance, can tell how much of the wonderful work for Christ accomplished by the first companions of St. Ignatius may have been due to the sacrificial and apostolic lives of hidden souls, such as the nuns of the great St. Teresa of Avila, who then was eStablishing those numerous foundations of her convents where ceaseless offerings were made of prayers, penances, and labors for the priests of God? Who knows how many a Peter Claver was helped in his apostolic career by the fervent zeal of an Alphonsus Rodriquez; how many an Augustine may have contributed mightily to the upbuilding of Christ’s Kingdom on earth because of the tears and silent prayers of a saintly Monica? And who can say where the greater merit lay in God’s sight? Each of us has his or her own glorious apostolate if we shall but keep our hearts pure and our intentions right.

Page 66

Page 67

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 3. RULERS OF THIS WORLD’S DARKNESS To the Laicism of the world, promoted with all the power of the spirits of darkness in high places, must now be opposed effectually our own apostolate for the spreading of Christ’s Kingdom on earth. Fighting with us is a heavenly army, spirits of light and saints in glory, ranged at our side or interceding for us at the Throne of God. And great indeed is the need we have of them. Presumptuous would be our struggle if we relied on our own weak Strength alone as matched against the invisible powers of evil, ever vigilant, and filled with envy, hatred and despair. “Put you on the armor of God,” St. Paul exhorts us, “that you may be able to stand against the deceits of the devil. For our wrestling is not against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers, against the rulers of the world of this darkness, against the spirits of wickedness in high places.” (Eph. vi. 11, 12.) These are the invisible forces that Stood behind Paganism in the days of St. Paul, and just as surely they are now instigating, directing and supporting the apostacy of our day. Let us not deceive ourselves by imagining 47

Page 68

    48 _. ‘ THE REIGN OF CHRIST there is any exaggeration in the words of St. Ignatius when in his “Spiritual Exercises” he describes Lucifer, the mortal enemy of our human race, “how he summons together innumerable devils; how he disperses them, some to one city, some to another, and so on throughout the whole world, omitting not any provinces, places or States of life, or any person in particular.” Precisely that same spirit of tireless activity characterizes the human agents whom they inspire and who finally yield themselves to become their instruments. Notice, too, with what thoroughness the works undertaken in the service of “the rulers of the world of this darkness,” as St. Paul calls them, are so often conceived, and with what zeal and energy they are carried out. For let us never forget that Satan, in the equally true and vivid words of St. John, is “the prince of this world” (xiv. 30), and that it is with him we are battling to win back for Christ the Empire of which Laicism, through the insidious wiles of that prince of darkness, has sought to deprive Him. Not all, of course, that is accomplished in the world is evil. Much is in itself quite indifferent. But what a deluge of literature daily pours forth from our modern press in which the name of Christ is never mentioned and His Kingdom utterly ignored! What ceaseless productions are presented to the public in our innumerable motion picture halls and palaces, with never a hint of the supernatural life! And yet Chris has told us: “He

Page 69

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 49 that is not with Me is against Me, and he that gathereth not with Me scattereth.” In a word, the vast bulk of the literature and art on which the public is intelleétually fed, acknowledges no supernatural code, no religious authority, no Kingdom of Christ. It is therefore the expression of Laicism, sometimes in a purely negative, sometimes in a positive and ageressive form. Much of it, if not immoral is unmoral, if not irreligious is unreligious. Its morality, often, is simply the social convention of the group to which the authors belong. At its best it leaves men without any supernatural stay in the great temptations, trials, and crises of life. The atmosphere of an unhealthy Laicism, thus created, as distinct from the atmosphere of Faith which men breathed freely in the Middle Ages, is all about us. What wonder, then, if it enters Christian homes left Standing open to its influence. Even Religious Communities must be on guard against it. The spirit of the supernatural can so easily be lost in the bustle of daily activities that all must constantly beware the subtle emanations of that spirit which by degrees suffocates faith, hope and charity, or at least benumbs them in the soul. What threatens us, in brief, is a spiritual asphyxiation to which Catholics who freely inhale this atmosphere, too often succumb, and which has in the past proved deadly to many. Our remedy and safeguard are the watchfulness and prayer commanded by Our Divine

Page 70

    50 c THE REIGN OF Chien Lord, together with the sacramental life thrown open most generously by the Church to all the Faithful because we need it greatly in these days. What is the reason for our Catholic schools except that our children, in the most critical years of life, may escape this miasmic influence, against which they must further be protected through their entire educational period! And Catholic educators, in turn, must rise to a full understanding of their own responsibilities in this regard. Yet not merely during their educational period, but throughout life must Catholics be guarded agains the atmosphere of indifference and apostacy surrounding them. Hence we behold the solicitude of the Church in endeavoring to infuse the Christian spirit into every form of popular enlightenment and entertainment. 4 . of (eee

Page 71

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 4. TRIUMPHANT COMING OF THE KING Needless to say, our policy is not merely one of protection and of self-defense. Our purpose must ever be not only to subject our own selves entirely to the empire of Christ, but to win for Him also other souls—to restore His reign wherever it has been banished from the hearts and minds of men, from their private or public life, from their mutual relations with one another, whether commercial, industrial, political, international, or purely social and recreational, that Christ may reign in all things. It is not hard to realize what a tremendous effect this purpose, if once strongly conceived, must have upon our lives. Enthusiastic loyalty to Christ will then be the entire wellspring of our being. Greatly to love Him, and as greatly to make Him loved will be the sole passion and ambition we shall care to own. “Thou art beautiful above the sons of men,” shall we exclaim with the Psalmist, “‘grace is poured abroad in thy lips, therefore hath God blessed thee forever and ever.” But as He is all tenderness to those who love Him so He will be terrible to those who reject and resist His sovereign Kingship over them: 51

Page 72

    52 ¢ THE REIGN OF CHRIST “Thy arrows are sharp, Under Thee shall people fall, Into the hearts of the King’s enemies. “Thy Throne, O God, is forever and ever, The scepter of Thy Kingdom is a scepter of uprightness. Thou hast loved justice and hated iniquity, Therefore God, Thy God, hath crowned Thee With the oil of gladness above Thy fellows.” (Ps. xliv, 6-8.) But more impressive even than the Psalmist’s picture is Christ’s own description of His final coming to this earth in His full power and kingly majesty. “As the lightning cometh out of the east and appeareth even unto the west, so also shall the coming of the Son of Man be.” The sun, we are told, will be darkened, the moon refuse her light, the Stars swing out of their orbits, and the powers of the heavens will be moved. “Then,” continues the sacred text, “‘shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in heaven, and then shall all tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall! see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven, with much power and majesty. And He shall send His angels with a trumpet, and a great voice, and they shall gather together His elect from the four winds, from the farthest parts of the heavens to the uttermost bounds of them.” (Matt. xxiv, 30, 31.)

Page 73

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 53 What a pitiable object in the sight of that overwhelming manifestation will be the dark, creeping, earth-bound thing we have called Laicism. Blinded in the effulgence of the glory and splendor streaming from the face of the Living God, it will look for the hills to cover it and the mountains to fall upon it and hide it away in that eternal darkness which will be its lot forever. Here on earth it loved darkness, it affeéted darkness, it was itself the fellow of that uncomprehending darkness whereof St. John wrote when he recorded the first coming of the Son of Man in our midst: “In Him was life, and the life was the light of men. And the light shineth in the darkness, and the darkness did not comprehend it.” (John i, 4, 5.) But then the day of retribution will have arrived. It will be the hour, no longer of darkness, but of light. Pricked to the core of its being Laicism will dwindle away with all its false pretensions. The pride and conceit of the world will shrivel up like a scroll in the fire. But with eyes divinely anointed the Blessed will look up and behold in all His glory the Immortal King of Ages. Yet how ashamed should we be, if at that final coming of the Son of Man in all His kingly power and majesty, we should be obliged to look back regretfully upon a life of neglected opportunities, of resolutions unfulfilled, of loyalties broken or but half-heartedly ren 

Page 74

    : C5 by the “goodness n ieve the ia to pa. and in rease “th ie, 0

Page 75

    “THE CROWN OF THORNS:

Page 76

Page 77

    CROWNED WITH THORNS AND SCEPTERED WITH A REED Murillo

Page 78

Page 79

    THE CROWN OF THORNS } 1. THE THORN-WREATHED HEAD OF CHRIST _ UT of the mist of years there Stands forth one C Visage with most Striking clearness. Saints and | sinners turn to it. Nothing more vividly impresses itself on the imagination or more deeply imprints its image on the hearts of men than that Face which the Prophet saw centuries before, its look “‘as it were hidden and despised,” yet which art has never tired of reproducing: “Hail the thorn-becrownéd Head, Face with spittings vile o’erspread; Hail that Visage, bleeding, marred, Smitten with the reed and scarred, And wounded all with blows!” Looking upward to that sacred Face of the God-Man nailed to the Cross, men and women in every generation have drawn from it courage to toil, endure and suffer for love of Him who bore so much for love of them, who, “having joy set before Him, endured the Cross, despising the shame.” (Hebr. xii, 2.) To wear the livery of Christ is the sublime ambition 7

Page 80

    58 |< THE REIGN OF CHRIST of those who aspire to the heights of Christian perfection. That livery of the King, in those who approach most close to Him in His privations and sufferings, is one of poverty at least in spirit, of humiliation and contempt. But the motive inspiring such a desire is none other than the love of Christ, and because of that love, the great and consuming wish to be most like to Him. Only that same motive of Divine love was able to bear upward the Saints to those rare heights where they could find in suffering itself their supreme happiness. To be delicate members under a thorn-crowned Head ever seemed to them the most abhorrent of all things, sin alone excepted. Beautifully and dramatically this entire thought is symbolized in the familiar incident from the life of St. Catherine of Sienna. Offered by her Heavenly Bridegroom the free choice between a crown of thorns and a _ crown of roses, she reached out, without hesitation, to the crown which Christ Himself had worn. How, with that great love she bore to Christ, her King and Saviour, would it have been possible for her to deliberate when to her mind came at once the thorn-crowned Head of her Love Crucified! From earliest childhood the Little Flower, too, had been taught these truths and was filled with the same heroic sentiments by the Divine Master, who in Person undertook to instruct and train her. Recording the senti 

Page 81

    ‘THE CROWN OF THORNS 59 ments which inspired her after one of her very first Holy Communions, she wrote: “My heart became inflamed with an ardent desire for suffering, and I felt convinced that many crosses were in store for me. Then my soul was flooded with such consolation as I have never since experienced. Suffering became attractive, and I found in it charms which held me spellbound, although as yet I did not appreciate them to the full.” Such are the wonders the grace of God could accomplish even in the soul of a child, who was so marvelously drawn to what nature, left to itself, could only contemplate with dread. And what were those charms by which the Divine Bridegroom thus captivated the heart of that little one whom He was preparing for Himself, and who responded so eagerly to all His advances of love? Surely foremost among them was the knowledge that she would thus become most like to Him. Referring to her devotion to the Holy Face, as practised in her more mature years, she concluded with this very thought: “T have made my life Study of these words of Isaias the Prophet: “There is no beauty in Him, nor comeliness; we have seen Him, and there was no sightliness that we should be desirous of Him.’ They have been the foundation of all my devotion to the Holy Face, or rather the foundation of all my piety. I, too, should desire to be

Page 82

    60 © THE REIGN OF CHRIST like Jesus, without sightliness, without beauty, unknown to every creature.” We behold here the same keen desire which actuated St. Catherine of Sienna in passing by the wreath of roses and reaching out eagerly after the crown of thorns. With such sentiments were necessarily combined Christ’s own yearning after souls. His cry on the Cross, “I thirst,” veritably haunted the thoughts of the Little Flower. “The cry of Jesus agonizing, ‘I thirst,’ reéchoed continually in my heart,” she wrote, “firing it with an ardent zeal till then unknown to me. I longed to give my Beloved to drink; I too felt myself consumed with thirst for souls, and at all costs I would win sinners from the eternal flames.” Thus, with the dart of Divine love deep in her heart, she could sing the swan’s immortal song in answer to that cry of Christ, returning Him love for love. Strong and sweet are the words of her canticle: “In wondrous love Thou didst come down from Heaven To immolate Thyself, O Christ! for me, So, in my turn, my love to Thee is given, I wish to suffer and to die for Thee. “To be like Thee is my desire, Thy voice finds echo in my soul,

Page 83

    THE CROWN OF THORNS 61 Suffering I crave. Thy words of fire Lift me above earth’s mire And sin’s control.” But to be like Jesus was not sufficient for her. She yearned to be with Him as well. “Too scant earth’s narrow scope!” we hear her cry, “the glorious Vision of Thy Face I crave.” That love at last became a very martyrdom in which she yielded up her soul to God. Truly could she write: “My long slow martyrdom of fire Still more and more consumeth me. Thou art my joy, my one desire, Jesus, may I expire Of love for Thee!” But even beyond the gates of death her wishes carry her, and she knows that only then will her apostolate for souls here upon earth really begin when she is dissolved and with Christ. Nor will there be any rest for her in this work of zeal until the last trumpet shall have pealed and time shall be no more: “Then I shall reSt, then I shall be able to rejoice, because the number of the elect will be complete.” In a word that Divine thirst for souls will not be slacked within her while there is still one sinner to be saved on earth. Here then is reached the very utmost

Page 84

    us now turn to Siar Divine Bs itself, ae it under the special aspect of Christ’s Kingship. The strong — contrast thus evoked is indeed mot impressive. es Strange as it may seem, the theme of that Kingship of Christ is nowhere brought home to us so constantly __ and vividly, during the entire earthly life of Our Saviour, as precisely duriie: the hours of His bitter Passion and Death. ae

Page 85

    THE CROWN OF THORNS 2. THE SHADOW OF A CROWN OF GOLD Reference, indeed, is made to the Kingship of Christ in no uncertain manner at the very moment preceding the fulfilment of the Mystery of the Incarnation. Infinitely more Stirring than any pomp and flourish of trumpets, heralding the entrance of earthly majesty, is the solemn announcement by the Archangel, Heaven’s Ambassador to the Virgin Mary, of the coming of the Orient from on high, the advent of the Mighty Ruler, who “shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Most High; and the Lord God shall give unto Him the throne of David His father, and He shall reign in the house of Jacob forever. And of His Kingdom there shall be-no: end.” (Luke 4, '32,°33:) But the glory of the everlasting Kingship of Christ, and the extension of His Kingdom to the uttermost parts of the earth, were not, as we well know, to lend their splendor to His mortal life. They were to find their shining symbol in no crown of gold encircling His head, as the Jews anticipated. All such thoughts vanish at once as we behold the Divine Child, the new-born King, with a Stable for His palace and a manger for His 63

Page 86

    64 ‘THE REIGN OF CHRIST throne, while between ox and ass, on the earthen floor, kneel Mary and Joseph. But poverty, humiliation and suffering are instead made sublimely lovable, as marking the free choice, on His first visible appearance in our midst, of Christ the King. Hardly had Christ been born in Bethlehem when His Kingship was brought to royal attention, but with results outwardly most humiliating and tragic. So Divine Providence permitted it to be. “Where is He that is born King of the Jews?”’ the Wise Men asked of Herod. They had seen His Star in the East and were come to adore Him. To Herod, however, it seemed at the sound of those words, as if his own petty throne suddenly swayed and rocked beneath him. There could be no peace for him now until he had compassed the death of the Babe whom he regarded as the rival to his royalty. Already, therefore, the Kingship of Christ is interpreted in a political sense, and the peaceful houses of Bethlehem are made to run with the blood of slaughtered infants, the firstlings of the long line of martyrs who would shed their blood for Christ the King. ““A voice in Rama was heard, lamentation and great mourning; Rachel bewailing her children, because they are not.” (Matt. ii, 18.) But out into the night, beneath the cold Stars, Joseph had fled with the Child and His Mother, homeless, friendless, to seek refuge in a digtant land. Who then

Page 87

    THE CROWN OF THORNS 65 seemed more unroyal than the Babe at His Mother’s breast; who more impotent than that exiled King, roofless, in a pagan land? Non eripit mortalia qui regna dat celestia. He was not here to wrest away earthly crowns who came to give celestial thrones. But Herod, obsessed with his ambitions and political suspicions, could not think of that. Poverty, humiliation, suffering, bloody persecution are already, therefore, the appanages of Christ’s royalty. With the opening of His public life we again behold the shadow of an earthly kingship falling long and large across His path. This time it is by Satan in person that the issue is raised. We remember the temptations of Christ in the desert. Twice the tempter had been foiled by Christ. The third time, the Scripture tells us, he took up Our Divine Lord into a very high mountain, and there showed Him “all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, and said to Him: ‘All these will I give Thee, if falling down Thou wilt adore me.’ ”’ (Matt. iv, 8, 9.) What else can this imply, understood in the language of that day, except the promise of a universal world empire, over which Christ should reign as King? “AU the kingdoms of the world” Satan delusively pledged himself to place under the single scepter of that one royal and mysterious Being there before him, whose nature was not revealed to him, whom he dreaded but could not fathom. And Christ, the All-holy, permitted Himself

Page 88

    66 ‘ THE REIGN OF CHRIST to be taken up by that fallen Angel to the solitary mountain height, and there solicited to accept a crown of world empire at the price of apoStacy from God! Truly, the patience of the Infinite! Once more we come to a great epochal period in the life of Christ. It was the eve of the great Eucharistic Promise, when He meant to give the first intimations of that sublime Mystery of Faith which He would institute a year later at the Last Supper. Two stupendous miracles were now to be worked by Him as an evidence of His power, that all might believe in His words when the Promise itself of the Eucharist should be given. The first of these miracles was the multiplication of the loaves and fishes. There were present at that event from ten to twenty thousand persons—five thousand men, the Scripture says, together with the women and children. All ate of the five loaves and two fishes which Christ then multiplied for them, and twelve baskets full of fragments were left over from the feast. Nothing, it would seem, should have been able more profoundly to move these people to the very depths of their being with a sense of the supernatural than this manifestation of Divine power to which they found themselves brought so close. They were stirred, it is true, and that most deeply, but only to give fresh vent to their old nationalistic ambitions. So far were they carried in this fener that they were determined even to seize Christ, and make Him their

Page 89

    THE CROWN OF THORNS 67 national King, whether He wished it or not. “Jesus, therefore,” are the words of St. John, “when He knew that they would come to take Him by force and make Him king, fled again into the mountain, Himself alone” (vi, 15). The mention of kingship had made Him flee from Herod. It now caused His flight from His own people. How grieved must that Divine Heart have been, filled as it was with thoughts of ineffable love, when across it there fell again the cold shadow of a purely earthly, political crown!

Page 90

Page 91

    ae THE CROWN OF THORNS 3. CHRIST’S KINGDOM NOT POLITICAL Between the offering of a crown and Chriét’s Passion just about one year elapsed. Then it was that the question of His Kingship—wilfully misinterpreted, misrepresented and misunderstood—was to become the turning point of the whole Tragedy of Calvary. In their own Sanhedrin the Jews had condemned Jesus on the charge of blasphemy. To the High Priest’s solemn adjuration, in the name of the living God, to tell them: “If Thou be the Christ the Son of God,” Jesus with equal solemnity affirmed this Divine Sonship; “Thou hast said it.” Then, before the tempest fell, there followed just one blazing vision of His eternal Kingship, to be swallowed up immediately in the total! eclipse of humiliations and sufferings that were now to overwhelm Him. “Nevertheless,” were His words, “I say to you, hereafter you shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the power of God, and coming in the clouds of heaven” (Matt, xxvi, 64).It is as King that He will come to the judgment of the world. The Jews did not faill to give to Pilate the true reason 69

Page 92

    70 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST for their condemnation of Jesus: ““We have a law,” they said, ‘‘and according to the law He ought to die, because He made Himself the Son of God” (John xix, 7). But that reason failed sufficiently to impress the mind of the Roman Governor. The religious reason was therefore deliberately changed into a political charge of treason against Caesar: “If thou release this man, thou art not Caesar’s friend, for whosoever maketh himself a king, speaketh against Caesar.” (John xix, 12.) This charge of political aspirations of royalty, aspirations which most of all Christ abhorred, was to prove decisive by arousing Pilate’s fears, for immediately the Scripture continues: “Now, when Pilate had heard these words, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the judgment seat.” There were Still some futile efforts on Pilate’s part to save Christ by playing in turn on the nationalistic sentiments of the Jews. “Behold,” he said, “your King!” And to their frenzied cries: “Away with Him!” “Crucify Him!” he raised the question: “Shall I crucify your King?” But it was all in vain. The charge of aspiring after political kingship ended in the Crucifixion. Through all the centuries the methods here followed in the condemnation of Christ have constantly been repeated in the attacks against Him in His members, and against His Mystic Body, the Church. They are the methods used in our own country and in our own day. Ambition of political power on the part of the Church,

Page 93

    ah, ae ae a THE CROWN OF THORNS 71 her rulers and representatives, is the accusation that will continue doubtless to be repeated, with tireless reiteration, to the end of time. The disciple is not better than the Master. What they have done to Him they will do to His followers no less. But preceding the events just related Our Lord had clearly set forth before the Roman Governor an explanation of His Kingdom that rendered Pilate’s action inexcusable. The very first words which St. John records as addressed to Christ by Pilate were: “Art Thou the King of the Jews?” To which Christ ultimately gave the answer: “My Kingdom is not of this world. If My Kingdom were of this world, My servants would certainly Strive that I should not be delivered to the Jews: but now My Kingdom is not from hence.” To Pilate’s further questioning; “Art Thou a King then?” Christ replied with a definite affirmation: “Thou sayest that I am a King.” (John xviii, 33-37.) Two things Christ tells Pilate concerning His Kingdom. In the first place, that although it is in this world, yet it is not “of this world.” It is no political