 and royal dominion. With a gripping brevity and succinétness the Apostle describes this future a¢ct of the Redeemer King: “Afterwards the end, when He shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God the Father, when He shall have brought to naught all [other] principality, and all [other] authority and power. For He must reign until

Page 124

    I0O . THE REIGN OF CHRIST [the Father] hath put all His enemies under His feet. The last enemy to be brought to naught is death.” (I Cor. XV, 24-26.) So, in His humanity, the Son Himself shall be subject to the Father, “who,” as the Apostle continues, “subjected all things to Him, that God may be all in all.” And yet, Christ, being God also and one with the Father and the Holy Ghost, will not thereby lose His royalty but will reign over His Kingdom to which for all eternity there shall be no end. Such is the picture, wonderfully rich, which the Scripture presents of the glorified Christ as He enters on that third and final phase of His reign, when the turmoil of earth is over, the gates of hell are sealed, and the joy of Heaven shall be unceasing in the beauty, honor, power, glory, love and tenderness of its Immortal King. But now we are Still in our time of trial, when our greatest happiness should be to render full and free subjection to Him. Servus Christi was the title in which St. Paul gloried. To be the bondman of Christ was his pride. Never could he insist too often on his joyful submission to the supreme dominion of the Saviour, whose bonds are bonds of love, who would call us, not servants, but children and brethren: Jesus Christ, ‘the first-born among many brethren.” In the words of the Apostle we are to be: “If sons, heirs also; heirs indeed of God, and co-heirs of Christ.” Being the Master of all Christ chose to be in the midst 7" ta \

Page 125

    THE KING OF GLORY IOI of His own as one who ministers. Being the Lord of all, He wished to be sold at the price of a slave and die the death of a slave, that He might purchase for us the glorious liberty of the children of God. To belong to Him, then, completely and unreservedly should be our greatest happiness, who are His by right of nature and of purchase at the price of His Precious Blood. May we be His also of our own free volition, in labor and prayer, in suffering and joy, in life and in death. And if the motive of Divine Love should ever weaken in the moment of trial, may we be buoyed up and encouraged by the words of the Apostle: “For that which is at present momentary and light of our tribulation, worketh for us above measure exceedingly an eternal weight of glory.” (II Cor. iv, 17.) May a deep, intimate, personal love of Christ ever be the characteristic of our lives.

Page 126

Page 128

Page 129

    The text on this page is estimated to be only 40.40% accurate
    auipl OF painqunp NaaNO UNO ‘AUVW ONINMOWO ONIM FHL LSTYHO

Page 130

Page 131

    THE QUEEN MOTHER 1. MARY AS QUEEN IN THE EARLY CHURCH JEN CONSIDERING the royalty of Christ the King and | His empire over all mankind, our thoughts naturally _ turn to Mary also, ever most closely associated with — Him in joy and in sorrow, in suffering and in glory. Through the ages Christ has been hailed as King of kings and Lord of lords. But Mary, too, has received throughout the Christian world her due title of “Our Lady,” and is proclaimed by all generations “Queen of angels and of men.” When the Wise Men from the East came to Jerusalem they inquired: “Where is He that is born King of the Jews? For we have seen His star in the East and are come to adore Him.” (Matt. ii, 2.) And when they found the Child with Mary His Mother they opened their treasures and offered the threefold gift becoming Him as God-Man-King. How do we think that they conceived of Mary? How, in their Oriental imagination, which did not deceive them, could they possibly have thought of her except as the Queen Mother? That she was also Mother of God made her tenfold Queen. 105

Page 132

    ¥ 106 THE REIGN OF CHRIST True, she was not seated on a throne preciously wrought out of the gold of Ophir, but neither was Christ the King bedded in a royal crib of ivory, inlaid with topaz and with emeralds. They looked to the reality of things, and not to the outward show. The pomps of royalty they could readily enough have found at the court of the Idumaean Herod without seeking any further. Mary simply was for them Queen Mother of the Eternal King, to whom they had come from afar, following the star, to pay their symbolic tribute. Similarly the Apostles could have thought of her in no other way than as the Wise Men did. And just in proportion as they gradually understood more fully and more intimately the true nature of the Kingship of Christ, they also more perfectly conceived of the queenhood of Mary. When at first their minds were Still confused as to the temporal Kingship of Our Lord, Mary was to them the direct descendant of David’s royal line. Her house of Nazareth, where they in the beginning came to speak with Jesus, was as the house of royal David. When in course of time their conception of the Kingdom of Christ grew more profound and spiritual, and the Spirit of God came upon them, with Mary in their midst, seated in the very place of honor that Christ would have occupied, their reverence for her, as Queen Mother of their Eternal King, took on a new and far more sublime

Page 133

    THE QUEEN MOTHER 107 significance. It was not needed that they should call her by that name. They bore their loyal reverence in their hearts. With the Divine illumination which the Spirit of God gave them they could not fail to know her as the Great Woman of prophecy, foretold to our first parents in Paradise; the Mother of Emmanuel, “God with us”; and finally as the Queen Mother concerning whose royal Child the Archangel announced to her that He should be called the Son of the Most High, and should hold the throne of David His father, and reign in the house of Jacob forever. These were familiar facts to them. Understanding so clearly the Kingship of Christ, how could the Apostles conceive of Mary except as the Queen Mother of their Lord and God? But this truth, so obvious to all, was taken for granted, rather than solemnly proclaimed and preached. First it was necessary to make known to the world her Divine Son. The Mother’s honor would follow of itself. Besides she existed entirely for Him. Yet all this is not meant to deny that public honors were actually bestowed on her in the Early Church. At the coming of the Holy GhoSst we find her specifically mentioned. In the very earliest centuries her picture is painted in the catacombs with the Christ Child at her breast, or else she is seen Standing alone and praying for us with extended arms, the great intercessor with her

Page 134

    108 ‘THE REIGN OF CHRIST Son, who Himself is the One Mediator between God and man. Already in those first Christian works of art she is the Queen Mother of the King, before whom we behold the Wise Men pictured with their gifts of homage offered to her Divine Child, or at whose side we see the Prophet pointing to the star and thus also recalling to us the scepter that should spring up from Israel, Christ the King. About the fourth century, with the triumphant crushing of the venomous Nestorian heresy, we behold her not merely jubilantly hailed as the true Mother of God, but also gloriously depicted as the Heavenly Queen, seated on her celestial throne, and holding out to mankind her Divine Son. It was but natural that as this devotion unfolded she should have come to be called through all the ensuing ages by the great title of “Our Lady,” embodying fully the thought of her queenhood, as this is most clearly expressed in the title universally given her and most truly due to her: “Queen of angels and of men.” With St. Dominic the devotion of the Rosary made that title the lex orandi, the code of prayer, for the Faithful throughout the centuries. The ceaseless recommendation of this devotion by the Church, and in more recent times the repeated Encyclicals written for its promotion by the illustrious Pope Leo XIII left no shadow of a doubt that in the Fifth Glorious Mystery, ““The Cor 

Page 135

    cel ad th

Page 136

Page 137

    a ee ee <= ~ te THE QUEEN MOTHER 2. OUR LADY’S CORONATION IN HEAVEN It matters not in what precise manner we conceive of Mary’s Coronation. The essential fact itself is clear enough to every Christian soul, that Mary is truly Queen of Heaven, Queen of angels and of men, and that now, by the side of her Divine Son, she is interceding for us, her other children, with all the efficacy her high position gives her as Queen Mother in the sight of the Immortal King of Ages. Yet, as every Catholic also knows, there is a fundamental difference in the rights of Christ and Mary to their respective titles of royalty and queenship. By His very nature, as the Incarnate Word, Christ is King of angels and of men. Mary, on the contrary, holds all her privileges and her power solely by reason of her relation to Christ. Again, Christ is King by reason of the Redemption, in that He purchased us with His Precious Blood. But in this great work, too, which in itself could be wrought by Christ alone, Mary codperated in her own way, although only secondarily and subordinately to Him. Hence, too, she could most properly be crowned as Queen at the IIt

Page 138

    J i hed . THE REIGN OF CHRIST side of her Divine Son with whom she had participated in His sufferings, as she had conceived and borne Him, and had brought Him up for His supreme Sacrifice by which the world was to be redeemed. To that Sacrifice she had already consented even in her “Fiat,” at the Angel’s message, when she accepted with all its consequences her Mother’s part in the Incarnation. What then could finally be more fitting than Mary’s Coronation? For Christ there can be no coronation. The crown belongs to Him already from the first moment of His existence. By reason of the Hypostatic Union He was conceived a King. Quite appropriate indeed are the crowned Statues and pictures of Christ the King, but the religious ceremony of publicly placing a crown upon a Statue of the Saviour is forbidden by the Church. It is unauthorized and misleading. Veni coronaberis, “Come, thou shalt be crowned,” could well be said to Mary by the Most Blessed Trinity, but not to Christ, who will come as King, offering to the Father all things made subject to Him at the end of the world. It is no mere fancy, but a substantial truth, that to the Infant wrapped in swaddling clothes and laid in a manger by Mary’s hands, belonged the earth and all its fulness. He was King even then of angels and of men. Few conceptions, on the other hand, have found more favor with Christian artists and Christian peoples than the Coronation of Our Lady. We behold her enthroned

Page 139

    THE QUEEN MOTHER 113 in the highest heights of Heaven. The glory of the Most Blessed Trinity encompasses her. Worshipfully she bends forward where she is seated opposite her Divine Son, who wears His own royal crown and places with loving hands the queenly coronet on the immaculate brow of Mary. The Holy Ghost hovers over her, in the shape of a dove, and the great spiritual figure of the Eternal Father enfolds her from above, as His beloved Daughter, in whom He is well pleased. The veneration of angels and the rejoicing of saints fills in the sublime scene. Our own hearts go out to her with a fondness that words cannot express as we witness her humility, her tenderness, her love. A warm and comforting feeling comes over us, for we know that now we are doubly loved and doubly safe. She is Mother and Queen, she combines the tenderness of her affection with the queenly power to obtain all good things for us. Mother and Queen! By those two titles we have a twofold claim on her that God respects, since we are both her children and her subjeéts. With redoubled confidence we can cry to her in our needs of body and of soul: “Show thyself a Mother, and show thyself a Queen; show thy love and show thy power in our regard who trust in thee and belong to thee, entirely, for Christ thy Son.” Is there any wonder that every century and every land has sought to represent her, after its own mo&t perfect conception of the ideal Mother and Queen!

Page 140

    II4 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST Poets, like painters, have delighted in celebrating her under both these attributes. Dante Gabriel Rossetti, though not a Catholic, ethereally and wistfully describes her, far in the dazzling heights of Heaven, and calls upon her to hear our prayers, that as Mother she may incline to us in all her tenderness of love, and as Queen she may assist us in her plenitude of power: “Soul, is it Faith, or Love, or Hope, That lets me see her standing up Where the light of the Throne is bright. Unto the left, unto the right, The cherubim, arrayed, conjoined, Float inward to a golden point, And from between the seraphim, The glory issues for a hymn. O Mary, Mother, be not loth To listen, thou whom the Stars clothe, Who seest and mayst not be seen, Hear us at last, O Mary, Queen! Into our shadows bend thy face, Bowing thee from the secret place, O Mary, Virgin, full of grace!” The illustrious Cardinal Newman gives us quite another picture, more tangible and familiar, in which he conceives of Our Lady exalted as on a pure white throne of ivory and silver, enriched with pearls and every pre 

Page 141

    THE QUEEN MOTHER 15 cious Stone. Yet the heavenly reality itself, as he well understood, is indescribably more rich and beautiful and splendorous than any gems of this dark earth could make it. But the best that he can he would offer to her, since it all redounds solely to the glory of her Divine Son: “Near to the Throne of the Lamb that was slain Sits the Queen of Heaven, the Star of the main: Her throne is of ivory, silver bedight, And with glittering pearls of the ocean is bright; The diamond glows with the emerald sheen, While the ruby and amethyst there are seen. If such be the splendor of Mary’s throne, Encircled by angels, a peerless zone, What must her own perfect beauty be, Dazzling with glorified majesty.” Particularly do artists and poets picture her as in that wonderful vision shown to St. John and narrated in the twelfth chapter of the Apocalypse. Even in the earliest writings of the Church which deal with Mary’s exaltation she is already identified with the Great Woman there beheld by the ApoStle. That the first reference in this passage is to the Church we fully realize, but it is no less generally conceded that the application can with equal right be made to Mary, as we shall later more amply discuss. .

Page 142

    116 THE REIGN OF CHRIST Mrs. Henry Jenner in her delightful book, “Our Lady in Art,” says: “The description of the Apocalypse of the woman clothed with the sun and having the moon under her feet and a crown of Stars, is held to be a description of what might be called the essence of Mary, the consummation of the second Eve, who undoes the work of the first Eve. “Tdealism can go no farther in art than the portraying of this mystery, for the pictures are not of Mary as she was at any one moment of her beautiful girlhood, but Mary, as God’s perfect work, as it exists in His Eternal Conception.” We have thus the close and inseparable association of the second Eve with the second Adam in the great Redemptive work, which implies no less than their close and inseparable relation in Heaven, as King and Queen of glory, understanding, of course always, Mary’s complete dependence on Christ. But as we think of Mary’s glory in Heaven we naturally express it in the words so familiar to us: “Our Immaculate Queen.” The queenship of Mary, like her Motherhood of the Incarnate Word, and like every other prerogative that belongs to her, has its fitting prelude in the Immaculate Conception. To realize more fully, therefore, how becoming to Mary is the queenship God bestowed upon her, we must enter more deeply into the significance of that sublime : : ;

Page 143

    Ceol 1 5 lory of | g eet benediction in the led * A ~~

Page 144

Page 145

    THE QUEEN MOTHER 3. MARY OUR QUEEN IMMACULATE “The foundations thereof are in the holy mountains,” sings the Psalmist. Applying those words to Our Blessed Lady Suarez writes that where the very loftiest heights of grace ever attained by any creature, human or angelical, reach the limits of their sublime altitudes, there the very first grace God ever gave to Mary already rises soaring above them. The soul of Christ alone, of all created beings, outshone her in the splendors of Divine grace. From the first moment of her Immaculate Conception, when her “ascensions” before God began, Mary therefore was already higher in grace than the highest Seraphim, or the sublimest of the saints at the summit of their perfection. Unimaginable to us as that sanctity is we can well realize that it was no less becoming to her who was destined to be the Mother of God’s own Eternal Son, the Queen of angels and of saints. Not even in the first moment of her being was she to be surpassed except by Christ alone, her own Divine Son. We can then but vaguely wonder what must have been that sanctity of Mary at her own supreme development and in the hour of her glorious Assumption into Heaven. 119

Page 146

    120 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST Perhaps this may help us to understand more fully that most transcendent of all tributes which the Church pays to Mary, precisely on the Feast of her Immaculate Conception, and which she never tires of repeating also on other occasions. That tribute is the application to her of the words direétly spoken by the Holy Spirit of Divine Wisdom. In the Epistle for the Mass of the Immaculate Conception; as also at Vespers, Matins and Lauds of the Divine Office for that day, the Church repeats with loying iteration the words of the Book of Proverbs which she applies to her: “The Lord possessed me in the beginning of His ways, before He made anything from the beginning. I was set up from eternity, and of old, before the earth was made. The depths were not as yet, and I was already conceived.” (Prov. viii, 22-24.) In their direct meaning, as I have said, these words obviously are meant to refer to the Eternal Word that in the course of time was to become incarnate in Mary. Yet the Church, while fully acknowledging Mary’s pure creatureship, delights in setting them like a jeweled crown, on the head of our Queen conceived Immaculate. Explaining this act in the very document which defines the dogma of the Immaculate Conception, Pope Pius IX wrote: “These very words with which the Holy Scripture speaks of Uncreated Wisdom and declares its origin in *. % ‘

Page 147

    THE QUEEN MOTHER 121 eternity, the Church is accustomed to use in her ecclesiastical offices and in the sacred liturgy, transferring them to the Virgin whose creation was determined by one and the same decree with the Incarnation of Divine Wisdom.” The Word is the substantial Image of the Father, Light of Light, true God of true God; but Mary is the created image of that Word, reflecting in a purely human way the beauty and glory which are from all eternity. In this sense we therefore can securely speak of her as “the brightness of eternal light, and the unspotted mirror of God’s majesty and the image of His goodness.” Conceived immaculate, she is in truth the reflected brightness of eternal light, without the shadow of sin to mar it; the unspotted mirror of God’s majesty, without one breath of evil to dim it; the image of His goodness, leaving justice in His own hands, but sweetly imaging His mercy, His bounty, and all the richness and the tenderness of the great Love that God poured forth into her heart for us. So, then, in the beginning of His ways the Lord possessed her. Together with the Uncreated Wisdom Mary Immaculate, Mary as Mother, Mary as Queen, is present in the eternal thought of God, “before He made anything from the beginning,” a pure joy in the Heart of the Almighty, a delight to the Most Blessed Trinity beyond the worlds of angels and of men that then were yet to be. And thus, in all truth, the Church can now

Page 148

    T2 ~ THE REIGN OF CHRIST continue to put upon her lips the words: “I was set up from eternity, and of old, before the earth was made. The depths were not as yet, and I was already conceived.” So, united with the Divine Wisdom, as the Mother decreed for the Only-Begotten of the Father, Mary may properly be conceived as present in the thought of her Creator when He enclosed the depths, and established the skies above them, when He poised the fountains of water and balanced the foundations of the earth, “playing before Him at all times, playing in the world.” Thus, whether in the creatureless vast of God’s eternity, or throughout the zons of His Creation, Mary Immaculate was ever present in the Heart of the Triune God, an unfailing joy, a fountain of gladness, a golden song without a discord, a pure delight, a happiness unclouded, a dulcet harmony rejoicing everlastingly the Heart of the Creator despite all that angel might wreck or man might mar in the work of His infinite Love: “IT was with Him, forming all things, and was delighted every day, playing before Him at all times, playing in the world: and my delight is to be with the children of men.” (Prov. viii, 30-31.) Enclosed in the mother love of Mary, beneath the mantle of her intercessory power, we too were present with Almighty God, and so her delight forever will be in the children of men. She is Mother of all who live by grace.

Page 149

    THE QUEEN MOTHER 123 Present with the Eternal before the beginning of days, deStined for creation by one and the same decree that determined the Incarnation of the Divine Wisdom, related in all reality with the Triune God Himself: as daughter with the Everlasting Father, as bride with the Most Holy Spirit, and as “Mother with the Incarnate Word, what less could Mary be than Mistress of Heaven and earth, Queen of angels and of men. It is not to Mary that God owes this, but to Himself. His infinite dignity requires no less. Her Coronation is but His due glory. How unthinkable then would be the thought that even for one instant Mary had been permitted to be the possession of the Evil One, marked by his talons and clouded by the breath of hell, before she finally became the Mother of God; that the Flesh of the All-Holy, drawn from her, should have been contaminated at its very source by sin. In the Strong words of Denis the Carthusian, we cannot but shrink with horror from saying that the woman who was to crush the head of the serpent should first have been crushed by him, and that the Mother of God should herself have been a daughter of Satan. But we know that by his divinely willed greeting the Angel declared her “full of grace,” and that so there could be no stain in her. We know, too, that the eternal enmity, which in the Garden of Paradise God promised should exist between Mary with her Child on the one

Page 150

    I24 * THE REIGN OF CHRIST hand and Satan with his spawn on the other, was to be an enmity absolute and complete, making even the slightest approach of original sin impossible for her. We can therefore understand the rejoicing throughout the Christian world when at last the dogma of the Immaculate Conception was defined by the See of Peter: “We define that the doétrine which declares that the Most Blessed Virgin Mary, in the first inStant of her conception, by a singular grace and privilege granted her by Almighty God, through the merits of Jesus Christ, Saviour of mankind, was preserved from all Stain of original sin, is a doctrine revealed by God, and therefore must be held firmly and constantly by all faithful Christians.”

Page 151

    THE QUEEN MOTHER 4. DISPENSER OF ALL THE KING’S BOUNTIES Between the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin and her Coronation in Heaven all proceeded in a beautiful and Steadily ascending sequence until we find her at the right hand of Christ, her Son, interceding for us and distributing all the graces that come to us from His hands. For she too had participated, although in a secondary and entirely dependent way, in meriting them for us. Beginning her life of grace at the first moment of her conception with a sanctity far surpassing that of the highest Seraph at the Throne of God, she continued it in absolute and perpetual sinlessness, rising in her constant upward flight on the mighty wings of love, until we behold her merged in the light and splendors of God —a creature Still, pure and simple, yet all encompassed in the glory of that Divinity she once bore within her womb and now enfolding her: a Woman clothed with the Sun, the moon beneath her feet, and round her head the circle of twelve Stars, each a lustrous privilege which the Almighty in His love bestowed upon her. Such is Mary, Mother, Queen Immaculate, crowned with stars, as from all eternity God possessed her in His 125

Page 152

    126 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST. Mind, the one creature without Stain or flaw in all our human race. We well understand, as already said, that the apocalyptic piéture of St. John in the first place refers to the Church herself. But it applies no less truly and fully to Mary, whom the Fathers—Strong as that word may seem to be—identify with the Church. We need but remember that the children of the Church are also, without one exception, the children of Mary, and that every grace that comes to us through the Church is beStowed on us through Mary’s intercession. On all this the Fathers of the Church are plain and clear so that there is no mistaking the truth of that sublime position occupied with God by Mary, our Mother and our Queen. By her “‘Fiat,” at the Incarnation she already mothered us all. For in that one moment she accepted, together with the Divine Motherhood, also the entire plan of the Redemption, and all her own part in it. For in every Step of that great work she participated, from the first formation of the Redeemer’s Sacred Body from her own pure and immaculate substance, to the consummation of His Sacrifice on Calvary. Hence again that other Strong word of the Fathers of the Church when they call her causa salutis, “cause of our salvation,” understanding thereby that in a secondary and subordinate, and yet in a true manner, she codperated with Christ in our Redemption. These indeed are great truths.

Page 153

    THE QUEEN MOTHER 127 Mary bore and nurtured the Divine Victim, she presented Him to the Eternal Father, she endured in her heart all the agonies of His Passion, so far as that was possible for her, and so finally she remains the dispenser of all the graces which she codperated with Christ in winning for us. Mary then is Queen, Queen Immaculate, and her hands are filled with the royal bounties of her Son. Every grace that comes to us she now obtains through her intercession as she assisted first to merit it. Such, then, is the teaching of the great Fathers of the Church and of the illustrious Pontiffs of our own later days. Christ alone is the Redeemer, the Mediator with the Father, but Mary is His helper, codperator, administra, so that in the magnificent language of Pope Leo XIII: “She who had been the codperator in the sacrament of man’s Redemption, might also be the codperator in the grace derived from Him throughout all time.” (Adjatricem Popult.) Mary is Queen, at the right of the King, dealing out with truly queenly munificence the boundless riches she obtains for us. They were won with her aid, they