 state, and mother nation with

Page 212

    ark ie 180 4 THE REIGN OF CHRIST colonies, than that which one may demand from the dealings of a grocer with his customer. . . . The liturgy now to be prescribed is going to proclaim all over the world in the language of display, which ordinary men best understand, that any contract of which Christ would not approve is unfair and unjust and that any politics which He would spurn is unworthy of any Christian, nay, of any nation.” In the history of mankind there has been no social influence to compare with that exercised in the past by the Catholic Church. But that same power Still resides unfailingly within her. Justice, codperation, and, above all, Jove, are her lessons to the world. The truly great social workers of the world are not the sociologists, economists, and social-service agents who have divorced social science from Divine Faith, but the men and women who, with help from on high, are able to inflame anew the hearts of the masses and the classes, with that love which burned in the Heart of Christ. This alone can make all men one—one in faith, one in love, one in that Divine brotherhood which is not silvered over only with fine words and phrases, but is true and golden to the core. | ?

Page 213

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 3. REPARATION DUE THE SACRED HEART The Encyclical on Christ the King, technically known as Quas Primas, was followed by another of equally permanent importance, written by the same Pope Pius XI on “The Reparation Due the Sacred Heart,” Miserentissimus Redemptor. At the very opening of this latter document we are confronted with the striking picture that presented itself to the eyes of the Supreme Pontiff as he looked down from his high watchtower “on the human family afflicted by so many grievous ills, and on the Church, assailed without respite by attacks and plots.” Again, therefore, we have the same world-wide sweep of vision, but also the same firm hope in the unfailing assistance of Him who promised: “Behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the world.” (Matt. xxviii, 20.) It is noticeable, too, that here again Pope Pius XI at once calls attention to the Encyclical of Pope Leo XIII on the Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart, Annum Sanctum. He quotes in fact the very passage in which that great Pontiff describes the vision of Con181

Page 214

    182 THE REIGN OF CHRIST Stantine when, as the newly born Church lay helpless under the yoke of the Caesars, a cross appeared in the heavens, “‘at once the sign and the cause of the marvelous victory which was soon to follow.” So, then, in words no less strong than those of his glorious Predecessor, he too concludes that we in our own day are favored by another, no less happy and auspicious sign, which should be for us the presage of victory: “The Most Sacred Heart of Jesus, crowned by a brilliant cross set among raging flames. In this Sacred Heart we should place all our hopes, from it, too, we ask and await salvation.” In that sign and in the devotion which it suggests, he sees the very substance of our religion and our guide to a more perfect life. As a consequence he urges anew upon the Faithful all the various forms of that most salutary and alluring devotion wherein Christ draws us to Himself by the wonderful manifestation of His ignored and outraged love for us. These forms have long been familiar to us. They are mainly: the Communion of Reparation received on the First Friday of the month, the beautiful practice of the Holy Hour, the act of consecration whereby we offer ourselves and all that belongs to us to the Sacred Heart of Jesus since all we have comes to us from the infinite Love of God, and so on to the consecration of the family, of associations and parishes, of public officials, of munici 

Page 215

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 183 palities and nations, and finally of the entire human race to that Divine Heart. In the institution of the Feast of Christ the King, the Pope himself sees the completion of all these devotions: “By that act We not only brought forth clearly into the light of day the faét of the supreme dominion of Christ, over all things, over civil society and the home, as well as over individuals, but We also experienced beforehand the joy of that most happy day when the whole world will submit gladly and willingly to the sweet yoke of Christ the King. Wherefore We commanded that together with the celebration of this Feast there should be renewed annually the Act of Consecration. This We did in order to obtain more surely and in greater abundance the fruits of such a consecration, and to bind with Christian love in the communion of peace all peoples to the Heart of the King of kings and Lord of lords.” Now to that same Act of Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart Pope Pius XI believed it expedient to add another, an Act of Expiation or Reparation, also rendered to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. The former is a return of the love of the creature for the Love of the Creator; the latter is an earnest amendment for the outrages against Uncreated Love that is overlooked by men or grieved and offended by reason of our sins. The fulfilment of this duty on our part we call Reparation. It may be noted here that whereas devotion to the Sacred Heart was practised centuries before the revela 

Page 216

    184 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST tions made to St. Margaret Mary, the one new aspect of that devotion, on which these revelations particularly insisted, was the practice of Reparation. Thus the Communions of the First Fridays were to be Communions of Reparation, as even the very Feast of the Sacred Heart, set by Christ Himself for the First Friday after the Octave of Corpus Christi, was to be a feast of Reparation. Appearing to the Saint before the Blessed Sacrament, in what is known as the fourth of the “Great Apparitions,” Our Divine Lord showed to her His Sacred Heart and said: “Behold the Heart which thas so loved men, which has spared nothing even to exhausting and consuming itself, in order to testify to them its love. And the great number of them make Me no other return than ingratitude, by their coldness and their forgetfulness of Me in the Sacrament of Love. But what is still more painful to Me is that hearts consecrated to Me use Me thus. “It is because of this that I ask you to have the First Friday after the Octave of Corpus Christi kept as a special feast in honor of My Heart, by receiving Communion on that day and making it a Reparation of Honor for all the insults offered to My Heart during the time that it has been exposed on the altars. “I promise you that My Heart will pour out in abundance the powerful effects of its influence on all those who will render it this honor and who will procure that others shall render it also.”

Page 217

    Mi THE ROYAL SERVICE 185 St. Margaret Mary even urged Spiritual Communions to be frequently made by her novices that they might therein beg forgiveness for the bad Communions that are being made. It was particularly in the Blessed Sacrament that the Saint saw Jesus insulted and outraged, and so she wished that atonement might be offered especially before the altar. The great devotion of the Holy Hour, which Jesus also taught her, is most frequently pra¢tised before the Blessed Sacrament. Here, too, whatever prayers may be said, the union with Our Lord in His Agony in the Garden must always be borne in mind. Made before the Tabernacle, it is an hour of adoration and reparation offered to Our Lord in the Eucharist. Thus we see how everywhere the idea of Reparation runs through this devotion to the Sacred Heart, as Christ wished it to be “practised in these latter days.” The purpose of the Holy See is to teach us to console the Sacred Heart for all the sins and thoughtlessness of men whereby it is wounded. “My Heart hath expected reproach and misery. And I looked for one that would grieve together with Me, but there was none: and for one that would comfort Me, and I found none.” (Ps. Ixviii, 21.) Christ being in glory can now indeed suffer no longer, but He foresaw all the indignities and outrages against Him and the ingratitude of men, and tasted the bitterness of them all during His mortal life. Moreover, as the

Page 218

    186 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST Holy See teaches, the expiatory passion of Christ is in a manner continued today in the Church, His Mystic Body. “His sufferings are complete,” says St. Augustine, “but in Him as in the Head; there remain even now the sufferings of Christ to be endured in the Body.” (Ps. Ixxxvi.) Thus, therefore, when Saul breathed threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, Christ appeared to Him and referred to all this persecution as really inflicted on Himself: “I am Jesus whom thou persecutest.”” (Acts ix, 5.) That persecution of Christ is going on in the world today. Powerfully Pope Pius XI describes it when he says: “There come to our ears from every side the cries of nations, whose rulers or governments have actually risen up and have conspired together against the Lord and against His Church. We have seen both human and Divine rights overthrown in these countries, churches destroyed to their foundations, religious and consecrated virgins driven from their homes, thrown into prison, made to go hungry, treated with unspeakable savagery. We have seen troops of boys and girls, torn from the bosom of Holy Mother Church, made to deny and blaspheme Christ, and urged to commit the worst sins against purity. We have seen a whole Christian people menaced, oppressed, in constant peril of apostasy from the Faith or of a most barbarous death.” No less sad to the Supreme Pontiff is the sight of

Page 219

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 187 those poisoned by false doétrines and without the light of Faith, who are leading a sinful life far from their Father’s house, while even among the Faithful he finds disrespect for the discipline of the Church and its ancient traditions on the increase. Modesty is forgotten and the sanctity of marriage ignored. On the other hand, among the Faithful, there are those who like the Apostles are asleep, or like the disciples have fled away in the face of these evils: “And because iniquity has abounded the charity of many shall grow cold.”’ (Matt. xxiv, 12.) In contrast to all this is the ever increasing number of those who offer satisfaction to the Divine Heart. Anyone considering these facts in the spirit of love, the Papal Encyclical concludes, cannot but abhor and flee all sin as the greatest of evils. “He will also offer himself whole and entire to the will of God and will Strive to repair the injured majesty of God by constant prayer, by voluntary penances, by patient suffering of all those ills which shall befall him. In a word, he will so organize his life that in all things it will be inspired by the spirit of Reparation.” And here is the great consoling thought for us: that as Christ foresaw all the evils that were to follow and suffered for them, so He also foresaw all our acts of reparation and delighted in them. “There can be no doubt that by His prevision of our acts of reparation,” writes the Holy Father, “He was in some way comforted when

Page 220

    188 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST ‘there appeared an angel from heaven’ to console that Heart of His bowed down with sorrow and anguish.” We are therefore urged to contemplate the sufferings of Christ, weighed down by agony and reproaches, and bruised for our sins; we are to understand that the offences and crimes of men were the real reason why He was condemned to death, and that every sin, whether committed now or in the past must be said to renew in a certain way the Passion of Christ, so that men are “crucifying again to themselves the Son of God and making Him a mockery.”’ And here we are to remember too our own sins and their part in Christ’s suffering. The Encyclical on Reparation culminates in these important words: “We eStablish, therefore, and We order that annually, on the Feast of the Sacred Heart, in all the churches of the world, there take place a solemn Act of Reparation to our most loving Redeemer, in order that we may by this Act make reparation for our own sins and may repair the rights which have been violated of Christ, the King of kings and our most loving Master.” From this praétice, as the Holy See assures us, we may well look foreward to most signal blessings for individuals and for domestic and civil society, since Our Lord Himself promised St. Margaret Mary that “He would shower abundantly His graces on those who rendered this honor to His Sacred Heart.” Thus to the dark cloud there is a glory of gold that

Page 221

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 189 edges it with radiant light, the Mercy of God that will be shown to mankind for these acts of reparation, while the Mother of Reparation, “Mary Reparatrix,” as the Holy See calls her, will intercede for us with Him who is the one Mediator of God and man, Christ Jesus. She it was, we are reminded, who gave us the Redeemer, watched over Him, and at the foot of the Cross offered Him as a Victim for our sins. So now it is His wish that she should also be associated with Him, “‘as the advocate of sinners, as the dispenser and mediatress of grace.” By her, therefore, we beseech Our Lord to receive our willing homage of expiation.

Page 222

Page 223

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 4. REIGN OF CHRIST OVER THE FAMILY Much has been said of the Kingship of Christ over the individual and over society at large, a word remains to be added about that most important domain of Christ the King, the family. The unit of society, as we have often been told, is the family. Within this the individual is begotten, nurtured and formed. It is the life cell of the social organism. Nothing can well be said that could exaggerate its vital importance. All our efforts to correct society would be a vain task if we failed to consider first the regeneration of the home. To reign over the Christian family, most absolutely and completely, is the great desire of the Heart of Christ. He would preside over its gatherings and bless all its undertakings, whether temporal or spiritual. The evils of modern society are rooted in the family. Out of its indifference or irreligion, the modern godlessness springs, still further promoted by an education in the schools that know not Christ. The plague of divorce, after destroying the home, continues to menace society 191

Page 224

    192 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST in its deadly effeéts. The vice of birth control has polluted and poisoned the very wells of life. Small wonder that indifferent Catholics have themselves been infected by the false principles of the world about them. ‘‘Moreover,”’ sadly writes the Holy Father in His Encyclical on Reparation, “disrespect for the discipline of the Church is on the increase among the Faithful as also disrespeét for ancient tradition, upon which the Christian life has been built, by which domestic society is governed, by which the sanctity of marriage is protected.” The effeminacy in the education of children, whereof he complains, and the immodesty of manner and dress, particularly on the part of women, are evils not seldom found in the modern Catholic home. The disintegration of the American home, as revealed in United States Government statistics, may be judged by the average of more than one divorce in six marriages. At the present rate of increase, writes an impartial observer, the average during the next two generations may be, “perhaps one in five, or more.” There is no salvation except to return to the ideal of the home of Nazareth, on which alone the Christian family can be rightly modelled. The difficulties are great and serious in our modern civilization, but by the grace of God Catholics will be able to meet their obligations if only they earnestly and confidently seek to do His Divine Will in their regard. For as the Apostle writes:

Page 225

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 193 “God is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above that which you are able; but will make also with temptation issue, that you may be able to bear it.” (I Cor. x, 13.) Strict observance of the law of God must combine with that natural prudence which is according to the Spirit of God, and above all recourse must be had to the supernatural means which the Church offers, particularly in the frequentation of the Table of the Lord. But there is one particular means which no Catholic parents should overlook, and that is the consecration of their homes to the Sacred Heart, which the Church so greatly urges upon them. The beautiful formula of that Act of Consecration, especially indulgenced by her, is given in the following section. In the first place the Consecration takes place before an image of the Sacred Heart. That likeness of Chris, with the thorn-crowned, cross-surmounted Heart, flaming in His Divine breast, should occupy a striking and prominent position in the home, where it can serve as a continual reminder of true family union, a sublime inspiration for good, and a constant incentive to love. Before that same image also the annual renewals of the Act of Consecration are solemnly to be made. The very presence of that image of the Sacred Heart thus honored in the home, carries with it most special blessings definitely promised in the revelations granted to St. Margaret Mary.

Page 226

    194 THE REIGN OF CHRIST “He assured me,” the Saint wrote, “that He is pleased especially to be honored under the appearance of His corporal Heart, and He desired that the picture of this should be publicly exposed for veneration, in order, as He added, to touch by this sight the unfeeling hearts of men. He promised me that He would pour forth in riche&t abundance all the gifts of grace wherewith His Heart is filled, upon the hearts of those who would show Him this honor, and that this picture should draw down blessings of every kind in all places where it is exposed for veneration.” The Act of Consecration itself is most perfedtly adapted to eStablish the reign of Christ over the family, and to render permanent within it that peace of Christ which He has promised to the homes where His Sacred Heart is honored. In it Christ is asked to reign over the minds and the hearts of all within that household, that they may live with His life and set an example of the virtues which He practised. On Him they call to dispel their cares, to sanctify their joys, to alleviate their sufferings. Through Him they look for perfeét resignation in life and death, confidently hoping thereafter to be reunited once more for an eternity of joy in Heaven. Quite fittingly, too, by “the Immaculate Heart of Mary and the glorious Patriarch St. Joseph,” this consecration is presented to the Sacred Heart of Christ. The reminders of them also should ever be about us, and what truly Catholic home does not display, with the image of

Page 227

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 195 the Sacred Heart, the representations likewise of Mary and Joseph? Such pictures and Statues, devotional in their nature and artistic in their beauty, have a powerful effect in constantly familiarizing the members of the family with those most powerful and glorious of friends, who should at all times be near and dear to them. Surely, also, there will be place for the Guardian Angel and perhaps the patron saints most specially invoked. How often, for instance, does not a glance at a likeness of the Little Flower strike the soul like a chord of heavenly music, banishing all that is low and base, leaving in the mind an exquisite sense of purity, and thrilling the heart with that childlike confidence and love of God which it is her mission to spread on earth to the end of time. A particularly happy custom is the consecration of parishes to the Sacred Heart, renewed each year at the most opportune time when the greatest numbers of the Faithful can be gathered. This concluded, the parishioners are induced to consecrate their own families to the Sacred Heart on their return to their homes. Thus not one single Catholic home should be left where Christ has not been conStituted King by this solemn dedication to His Divine Heart. In this work, teachers, too, it is suggested, can be helpful by inducing their pupils in our Catholic schools to

Page 228

    196 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST write out the Aét of Consecration of the Family and persuade their parents to dedicate their homes to the Sacred Heart. Thus even little children can be made missionaries to spread the Kingdom of Christ on earth. Similar use of God’s little ones to bring about the very conversion of their parents from pagan superstitions is sufficiently common in mission countries. Besides the family consecration there are of course the individual aéts which each one can make. Here, for instance, is a brief indulgenced formula, to be recited before an image of the Sacred Heart: “My loving Jesus, out of the grateful love I bear Thee, and to make reparation for my unfaithfulness to grace, I (N.N.) give Thee my heart, and I consecrate myself wholly to Thee; and with Thy help I purpose never to sin again.” But true and deep devotion to the Sacred Heart cannot possibly remain a mere personal affection for Our Divine Lord, nor even can it be confined within the family circle. It must of necessity become social, national, world-embracing in its zeal—at least so far as its prayers, intentions and aspirations are concerned. Most of us, besides, will be able to do much prattical, far-reaching good in the aid of worthy causes that promote the Reign of Christ upon the earth. “The harvest indeed is great, but the laborers are few. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest that He send

Page 229

    a THE ROYAL SERVICE 197 forth laborers into the harvest.” Who at all events cannot do that much? “I have a baptism wherewith I am to be baptized: and how I am Straitened until it be accomplished.” Such was the longing of Our Lord Himself for souls, even unto the baptism of His own Blood to be consummated on the Cross. Unless something of this zeal has taken possession of our hearts we have understood little as yet of that devotion to the Sacred Heart of Our Saviour who came to cast fire upon the earth and wishes to see it kindled and spread out into one earth-enveloping flame of love. The spiritual campaign thus unfolded before us in these pages is wide as the world and vast as mankind. The desire of the Holy See in eStablishing the Feast of Our Lord Jesus Christ as King and in consecrating td His Sacred Heart the entire human race, was no less, as we have seen, than to subject to the sweet Reign of Christ every individual, every family, every society, every nation of the world until the whole earth might resound with one hymn of praise and glory to the Sacred Heart. In this great mission, in this modern crusade, in this vast campaign, before which all others dwindle into insignificance, where shall be our place; what shall we do to promote, most widely and effectively, the Kingdom of Christ upon earth? That is the question for each one to ponder and answer, with the aid of the spirit of God. It is a question

Page 230

Page 231

    TO THE SACRED HEART

Page 232

    The text on this page is estimated to be only 37.50% accurate
    Ms Soe

Page 233

    TO THE SACRED HEART ACT OF CONSECRATION OF THE HUMAN RACE TO THE SACRED HEART OF JESUS Ordained by Pope Pius XI to be publicly renewed each year on the last Sunday of October, the Feast of Christ the King. OST SWEET JESUS, Redeemer of the human M race, look down upon us humbly prostrate before Thy altar. We are Thine, and Thine we wish to be; but, to be more surely united with Thee, behold each one of us freely consecrates himself today to Thy Most Sacred Heart. Many indeed have never known Thee; many too, despising Thy precepts, have rejected Thee. Have mercy on them all, most merciful Jesus, and draw them to Thy Sacred Heart. Be Thou King, O Lord, not only of the faithful who have never forsaken Thee, but also of the prodigal children who have abandoned Thee; grant that they may quickly return to their Father’s house lest they die of wretchedness and hunger. Be Thou King of those who are deceived by erroneous opinions, or whom discord keeps aloof, and call them back to the harbor of truth and unity of faith, so that 201

Page 234

    darkness of idolatry or of Islamism, and re ot draw them all into the light and kingdom of God. thine eyes of mercy towards the children of that race once Thy chosen people. Of old they called down up _ themselves the Blood of the Saviour; may It now descen upon them a laver of redemption and of life. Grant, | Lord, to Thy Church assurance of freedom and imm nity from harm; give peace and order to all nation and make the earth resound from pole to pole with one cry: Praise to the Divine Heart that wrought our salvation; to It be glory and honor forever. Amen.

Page 235

    TO THE SACRED HEART ACT OF REPARATION TO THE SACRED HEART OF JESUS Ordained by Pope Pius XI to be publicly made each year, in all the churches of the world, on the Feast of the Sacred Heart of Jesus. for men is repaid with blackest ingratitude, so forgetful, so heedless, so scornful of Thy great goodness: behold us prostrate before Thy altar, seeking with special tribute of honor to atone for the sinful indifference of men and for the outrages heaped from every side upon Thy most Loving Heart. And yet, mindful that we also more than once have been guilty of like unworthy deeds, we are Stirred to deepest sorrow and therefore we beseech Thy mercy, first of all, upon ourselves. We are eager and resolved to make amends not only for our own transgressions but also for the sins of those who, straying far from the path of salvation, either will not follow Thee as shepherd and leader, or trampling under foot their baptismal vows have shaken off the easy yoke of Thy holy law. 203 Sis SAVIOUR JESUS, whose boundless love

Page 236

    204 : THE REIGN OF CHRIST We seek, O Lord, to atone for this wickedness in all its hideous forms. In particular we purpose to expiate immodesty and shamelessness in behavior and dress, the numberless snares that are laid for the corruption of innocent minds, the breaking of holy days, the horrible blasphemies uttered against Thee and Thy saints, the revilings flung at Thy Vicar on earth and at Thy priesthood, the slights which are put upon Thee in the very Sacrament of Thy divine love, the frightful sacrileges by which It is profaned, and lastly the wrongs that are publicly committed by nations in defying the authority and in violating the rights of the Church which Thou didst establish. Would that with our blood we might wash away such awful crimes! The more earnestly, O Lord, as reparation to Thy divine honor, we offer Thee the self-same satisfaction which once Thou didst offer on the Cross to Thy Father, and which daily is renewed upon the altar, beseeching Thee to receive it together with the expiations of Thy Virgin Mother, of all Thy Saints, and of all devout Christians. From the bottom of our hearts we promise, with the help of Thy grace to compensate as far as in us lies for our evil doing, for the sins of others and for our coldness and theirs toward Thee and Thy most generous love. This we propose to do by unyielding firmness of faith, by pureness of life, by perfect observance of the Gospel law, above all, the precept of charity. We promise to hinder as best we can any further offenses '

Page 237

    TO THE SACRED HEART 205 against Thee. We will bring, moreover, as many as possible into Thy holy fellowship. Receive, we beseech Thee, Jesus most kind, through the intercession of Blessed Mary ever Virgin, Mother of Reparation, our willing homage of expiation. Grant us the gift of perseverance and through it keep us ever faithful to our duty and to Thy service, so that we all may come at last to that blessed homeland where Thou together with the Father and the Holy Spirit livest and reignest God,