The reign of Christ, the immortal king of ages

      The reign of Christ, the immortal king of ages

          Notice

Notice

    This book was produced in EPUB format by the Internet Archive. The book pages were scanned and converted to EPUB format automatically. This process relies on optical character recognition, and is somewhat susceptible to errors. The book may not offer the correct reading sequence, and there may be weird characters, non-words, and incorrect guesses at structure. Some page numbers and headers or footers may remain from the scanned page. The process which identifies images might have found stray marks on the page which are not actually images from the book. The hidden page numbering which may be available to your ereader corresponds to the numbered pages in the print edition, but is not an exact match;  page numbers will increment at the same rate as the corresponding print edition, but we may have started numbering before the print book's visible page numbers.  The Internet Archive is working to improve the scanning process and resulting books, but in the meantime, we hope that this book will be useful to you. The Internet Archive was founded in 1996 to build an Internet library and to promote universal access to all knowledge. The Archive's purposes include offering permanent access for researchers, historians, scholars, people with disabilities, and the general public to historical collections that exist in digital format. The Internet Archive includes texts, audio, moving images, and software as well as archived web pages, and provides specialized services for information access for the blind and other persons with disabilities.Created with hocr-to-epub (v.1.0.0)

Page 1

    The text on this page is estimated to be only 13.00% accurate
    eee

Page 2

    The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.29% accurate
    J meh ina aies ite . Set Yh’, iy ah 9 ORF ey hp gen Vek Poet,

Page 3

Page 4

    The text on this page is estimated to be only 7.50% accurate
    . *

Page 5

Page 6

Page 7

Page 8

    LORD OF LORDS AND KING OF KINGS Adapted f 

Page 9

    THE REIGN OF CHRIST THE IMMORTAL KING OF AGES BY Rev. JOSEPH HUSSLEIN, S.J. FORDHAM UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF SOCIOLOGY AND SOCIAL SERVICE AUTHOR: ‘“THE WORLD PROBLEM,’’ ‘‘DEMOCRATIC INDUSTRY,” ‘*EVOLUTION AND SOCIAL PROGRESS,’” ‘‘THE LITTLE FLOWER AND THE BLESSED SACRAMENT,” ETC. BT 201 H85 1928 glas Husslein, Joseph Casper, 1873The reign of Christ : the immortal Computer ID: 53570 NEW YORK P. J. KENEDY & SONS 1928 OrNnkR Ohi} & 8506

Page 10

    Jmprimi Potest: Epwarp C. PHILLIPs, s.J. Praepositus, Prov. Marylandiae-Neo Eboracensis Rihil Cbstat: ArtTHur J. SCANLAN, S.T.D. Censor Librorum Hmprimatur: bq Patrick Carpinat Hayes Archbishop, New York New York, October 18, 1928. CopyricHT, 1928, BY P. J. KENEDY & SONS New York PRINTED IN THE Unrrep STATES OF AMERICA

Page 11

    PRESS ONWARD TO THE 2 ENNING” ‘THE WORLD FOR HIM

Page 12

Page 13

    FOREWORD O aid in the promotion of the Reign of Chris throughout the world is the aim of this book. It is a graphic and practical development of the vital thoughts contained in the great Encyclicals dealing with the Universal Sovereignty of Christ the King. These thoughts are of more than passing interest. They are meant to be of permanent and supreme importance in the life of the Church, and to have a profound influence on the future course of history. The volume is planned to be of general service to all the Faithful, since the express desire of the Holy See is that everyone, without exception, be familiarized so thoroughly with the thoughts here set forth that they must exercise a lasting influence over the lives of all. Priests and Religious, it is hoped, will draw help and inspiration from it, especially those who have the obligation of annually instructing the people on this urgent theme. Appealing to the Hierarchy of the Catholic world, Pope Pius XI solemnly exhorted them “to see that on Stated days before the annual celebration of the Feast of Christ the King, sermons be preached to the people in Vv

Page 14

    vi er FOREWORD every parish, informing and inStruéting them accurately on the nature, manner and importance of the subje¢t, so that they may arrange and conform their lives in such a manner as to be worthy of giving faithful and zealous tribute to the Empire of the Divine King.” The Universal Sovereignty of Christ the King, always acknowledged within the Church, was officially proclaimed in the Encyclical Annum Sacrum of Pope Leo XIII, who first consecrated all mankind—Catholic, Protestant, Jew and Infidel—to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. “His Empire,” he wrote, “extends not only over Catholic peoples, and over those who, reborn in the font of Baptism, belong by right to the Church even though error has driven them far and dissension has separated them from the bond of love; it embraces even those who do not enjoy the Christian Faith, so that all mankind is most truly under the power of Jesus Christ.” The same thought was confirmed and set forth more fully in the Encyclical Quas Primas of Pope Pius XI on the Establishment of the Feast of Christ the King, on which Feast also the Act of Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart of Jesus is prescribed to take place annually. Again, this thought was supplemented in the Encyclical Miserentissimus Redemptor, by the same Pontiff, on the Reparation Due the Sacred Heart. Catholics are here called upon to make amends to the Heart of the ee PT oy

Page 15

    FOREWORD Vii Sovereign King, ignored and contemned by the world, and to offer expiation also for their own offenses that have grieved the Divine Heart. To this end the Encyclical prescribes a special Act of Reparation to be recited each year in all the churches of the world, on the Feast of the Sacred Heart. The importance attached by the Church to this subjet is therefore clear. The purpose of the author has been faithfully to interpret the spirit of the great papal documents that are meant to be especially directive for our own and future times. Careful attention has further been given to reveal the full historic background of the message conveyed in these Encyclicals. Finally the Acts of Consecration and of Reparation, as prescribed in them, are here given, and also the indulgenced Act of the Consecration of the Family to the Sacred Heart of the Divine King of kings and Lord of lords. An invaluable addition for convenient reference is the Appendix containing, in their entirety, the two Encyclicals on Christ the King and on Reparation. The translations are those issued by the National Catholic Welfare Conference, and copyrighted by it.

Page 16

Page 17

    CONTENTS THE ETERNAL KING CHAPTER I PrepicTion or Curist’s KincsHIP II Tue Nature or Curerst’s KincsHip . III True Concept or Curist’s Kincpom . ITV Worwv-Conqurst aND SELF-CoNQUEST THE KINGDOM MILITANT I Cmrrst’s SoverrIGcNty ImpucNED II Promotion or Curist’s Kincpom . III Rvuvers or Tuts Worip’s Darkness . IV TrrumpHant Cominc ofr THE KING THE CROWN OF THORNS I Tue THorn-WreatHeD Heap oF Cueist . II Tue SHapow oF A Crown oF GoLp . III Czrrerst’s Kincpom Nor Po titicav . IV Tue Bioopy Crowninc oF Our Kinc . THE KING OF GLORY I Tue STANDARD OF THE KING . Il Tree or SHAME AND THRONE OF GLoRY . Ill Tue Propuet’s Five Worip-Empirss . IV Tue Kincpom Wuicu Gop Has Ser UP . THE QUEEN MOTHER I Mary as QueEN IN THE Earty CHurRcH . II Ovr Lapy’s CoronaTION IN HEAVEN . ix 105 III

Page 18

    x - CONTENTS CHAPTER III Mary, Our Queen ImMMacuLATE . IV Dispenser oF ALL THE Kino’s BountTiEs . THE GREAT PATRON I JosepH’s Power AND EXALTATION . : II JosepH’s ReLaTion To Curist THE KING . III Parron Over ALL Curtst’s KincpoM . THE HEART OF THE KING I Rercn oF THE SacrED Heart ForeTox . II “In Tuts Sicn Conquer” . a tai III ConsEcraTION oF Worxtp To SAcrED HEART THE ROYAL SERVICE I Tue Feast of Curist THE Kinc . II Socrat Reicn of Curist THE KiNG III Reparation Dur THE Sacrep Heart . IV Reten oF Curist Over THE Famity . TO THE SACRED HEART I Acr oF ConsEcrATION OF THE Human Race . II Acr or REpaRATION To THE SAcrED Heart . III Acr or ConsEcRATION OF THE FamILy IV Acr or Persona Loyatty To Our Kine . APPENDIX Tue EncycricaL on Curist THE Kinc . Tue EncyciicaL on REPARATION 213 743

Page 19

Page 20

Page 21

    THE ETERNAL KING 1. PREDICTION OF CHRIST’S KINGSHIP IAR back in the early history of the Israelite race, Ps prediction of the Kingship of Christ was made by the mouth of the Gentile Prophet Balaam. “‘A Star shall rise out of Jacob,” he declared under the Divine inspiration, “and a scepter shall spring up from Israel.” (Num. xxiv, 17.) Centuries passed, and illumined from on high the Prophet David sang in Still clearer terms of the future Messianic King. He should be set over Sion, the Church of the living God; to Him all the nations of the earth should be subject, and He Himself would be the very Son of God. In the second Psalm, which is particularly prophetic of Christ’s Kingship, we are presented with this future Ruler describing in His own words the Kingship set apart for Him by the Eternal Father: “But I am appointed King by Him Over Sion His holy mountain, Preaching His commandment. “The Lord hath said to Me: 3

Page 22

    4 : THE REIGN OF CHRIST “ *Thou art my Son, This day have I begotten Thee, Ask of Me, and I will give Thee The Gentiles for Thy inheritance, And the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession,’ ”’ (Ps. ii, 6-8.) So through the Psalms ring on the wonderful predictions of that great Messianic King. “With Thy comeliness and thy beauty set out, proceed prosperously and reign,” the Prophet greets Him, and then, ascending higher, proclaims in glowing words His Divinity: “Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever; the scepter of Thy Kingdom is a scepter of uprightness.” (Ps. xliv, 5, 7.) Thus the Prophet did not lose sight of the two distinct natures in Christ, the human and Divine. He is God from eternity, man begotten in time: the God-Man King. No less clearly is the universality of His Kingship predicted, which we are told shall extend in a reign of justice and peace over all the earth: ““And He shall rule from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth. ?s (Ps. feet} As time advanced came the great Prophecies of Isaias, Jeremias, Daniel, and Zacharias. Well might we depict these seers of Israel! Standing, scroll in hand, glorious about the Throne of that Son of Man, of whose Kingdom there shall be no end. Each in turn limns for us his own

Page 23

    THE ETERNAL KING 5 picture of the Divine King as foreseen by him. Together they present Him to us under many and various aspects. We behold Him in His greatness, His tenderness, His power, His beauty, His meekness and humility of Heart; in His sufferings as welll as in the glory of His exaltation throughout eternity. Few passages of the Old TeStament are more familiar to us than that of the Prophet Isaias in which he tells us of the future coming of the mighty King, who should be no less than God Himself, the Infinite, appearing upon earth in the lowly and endearing form of a human Babe. Jubilantly he sings: “A Child is born to us, And a Son is given to us, And the government is upon His shoulders, And His name shall be: “Wonderful, Counsellor, God the mighty, The Father of the world to come, The Prince of peace. “His empire shall be multiplied, And there shall be no end of peace; He shall sit upon the throne of David, And over his kingdom.” (Is. ix, 6, 7.) In the same manner Jeremias beheld Him as a descendant of David, by nature both Man and God, who should

Page 24

    6 _ * TEE REIGN OF CHRIST rule in wisdom and in justice. “I will raise up to David a just branch,” he makes the Eternal Father say. “A King shall reign and be wise, and shall execute judgment and justice on earth.” Salvation and security shall come through Him, and the name by which He shall be called is to be: “The Lord Our Just One.” (Jer. xxiil, , 6.) : Neither Isaias nor Jeremias means to imply that the so-called “‘names”’ they assign to the future Saviour are to be underStood as proper names in our sense of that word. They are merely terms by which the Prophets mean to express the qualities that will distinguish the Divine King who is to reign over a universal Kingdom of which there shall be no end. But to Daniel was given the vision of that same Infnite Ruler, the Son of God and yet “the Son of Man,” as He will appear in glory when time shall be no more. He is shown coming on the clouds of Heaven into the Presence of the Eternal Father, “the Ancient of Days,” of whom the Prophet says: “And He gave Him power, and glory, and a Kingdom; and all peoples, tribes and tongues shall serve Him. His power is an everlasting power that shall not be taken away, and His Kingdom that shall not be destroyed.” (Dan. vii, 14.) The glory of external royalty was not to be assumed by Christ here below, but will shine forth all the more resplendently in His heavenly Kingdom, where He is .

Page 25

    THE ETERNAL KING 74 to reign forever. But the Church, His Kingdom upon earth, must continue its task after His own glorious Ascension to the Father until it too will finally be translated into glory with Him, for the Militant Kingdom of Christ on earth is to find its fulfilment in the Triumphant Kingdom in Heaven. Of this last Stage of Christ’s Sovereignty Daniel wrote in the passage I have just quoted. But it was the Prophet Zacharias who with wonderful charm described the public appearance of Christ the King on earth, in all His lowliness and humility of Heart. The Jews who mistakenly looked for His imperial coming here below in all the pomp and panoply of royalty, with flying pennons and victorious legions, had sadly overlooked the words of this Prophet when he sang: “Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Sion! Shout for joy, O daughter of Jerusalem! “Behold thy King will come to thee, The Just and Saviour: “He is poor, And riding upon an ass, And upon a colt, the foal of an ass.” (Zach. ix, 9.) So in reality were the Jews to behold Him on His great entrance into Jerusalem, when they would strew

Page 26

    8 ‘ THE REIGN OF CHRIST their branches of palm before Him and spread their garments in His way. A few days more, and the supreme tragedy would be enacted of which the Prophets had no less clearly foreseen every detail. The entire Passion can be described by piecing together the prophetic passages of the Old Testament that tell of the humiliations and sufferings of the future Messias King. The exact date had been prediéted by Daniel when “Christ the Prince,” should be put to death (Dan. ix, 26), while the Psalmist no less minutely foretold not merely the piercing of His hands and feet, but even the parting of His garments among them by the soldiers, and the casting of dice for His veSture. (Ps. xxi, 19.) And yet, as the Prophets no less clearly assured us, the final victory of that King of sorrows was never to be in doubt. In few but mighty words the royal Psalmist expresses the everlasting triumph of the Messianic Ruler, seated at the right hand of the Eternal Father: “The Lord said to my Lord: Sit Thou at My right hand, Until I make Thy enemies Thy footstool.’ ” (Ps. cix, i.) 4 3 $ 7 ~ as Such, in the Prophet’s words, was the promise of the Father to Christ, the Immortal King of Ages. In vain would the Gentiles rage and the people devise vain things. In vain would the rulers of the earth stand up

Page 27

    THE ETERNAL KING 9 and its men of might and blood meet “against the Lord and His Christ.” All mus at last submit to His sway of love or be crushed beneath the force of His infinite and irresistible power: “Thou shalt rule them with a rod of iron, And shalt break them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.” (Ps. ii, 9.) The very place of the birth of this King had been accurately predicted in that charming Prophecy of Micheas which we never tire of repeating and which, with each recurrent Christmas Day, is like the sound of music in our ears: “And thou, Bethlehem Ephrata, art a little one among the thousands of Juda: out of thee shall He come forth unto me that is to be the Ruler in Israel: and His going forth is from the beginning, from the days of eternity.” (Mich. v., 2.) The temporal birth of the Messianic Ruler, in the little town of Bethlehem, here foretold, is thus at the same time Strikingly associated with His going forth from the beginning, His eternal birth from the Father, His Divinity. The same Divine Person, possessing the Divine nature received from the Father, “from the days of eternity,” would in the course of time take unto Him 

Page 28

    10 * THE REIGN OF CHRIST self also a complete human nature, to be given Him by a human Mother. What the Prophet prediéted we now all know took: place in that very Bethlehem of old, when the Word was made flesh of the Virgin Mary, and dwelt in our midét, Emmanuel, “God with us.” But to all these Old Testament Prophecies, which I have not tried to exhaust, there was added Still another. It was spoken by no mortal lips, but by the Angelic Ambassador from the Court of the Most High, sent to the little maiden Mary, espoused to a man named Joseph, of the house of David, in the city of Galilee called Nazareth. The hour of God’s Providence had come, and humbly the great Archangel Gabriel announced to her the Son who should be born of her: “He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Most High and the Lord God shall give unto Him the throne of David His father; and He shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever. And of His Kingdom there shall be no end.” (Luke i, 32, 33.) Thus the Archangel himself once more repeated and summarized for us, as it were, the Prophecies of Christ’s Kingship and Kingdom that would now go into fulfilment. Surely there can be no doubt as to the fact of Christ’s universal Kingship. t ¥. » . a «

Page 29

    THE ETERNAL KING 2. NATURE OF CHRIST’S KINGSHIP The first question naturally to be asked is: in what precisely does that Kingship consist which the Old Testament so clearly predicted of Christ, which He Himself so plainly and frequently asserted, and which through the centuries the Church has unfailingly acknowledged? In answering this question we must first determine under what aspect we are to consider Our Divine Lord, since with equal truth He is both God and Man. As God Our Divine Lord is by nature one with the Father and the Holy Ghost from all eternity, uncreated, infinite, omnipotent, equal in all things with Them. Of His Kingship, therefore, under this aspect, there can be no doubt. His are the Heavens and the glory of them; His is the earth and the fulness thereof. “Where wast thou,” He could speak to Job out of the whirlwind, “when I laid the foundations of the earth ... when the morning Stars praised Me together, and all the sons of God made a joyful melody?” (Job xxxviii, 4, 7.) Before Abraham was Christ is. “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word II

Page 30

    I2 _ * THE REIGN OF CHRIST was God. . . . All things were made by Him, and without Him was made nothing that was made. . . . And the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us.” (John i.) As Creator of all Christ must necessarily also be King of all. It is only, therefore, regarding Christ as Man that any doubt as to His universal Kingship might possibly have arisen in the mind of anyone, and it is under this aspect particularly that the Holy See, in the great Encyclical Letter on Christ as King, vindicates for Him the complete dominion over all things here upon earth, as well as over the celestial spirits in Heaven, and over the entire creation. Considered as Man Christ is King dy nature. The universal sovereignty over all created beings is due to Him because of the union in Him of the Divine with the human nature, under the single Personality of the Eternal Word. There is in Him, as we know, no confusion of these two natures, for He is perfect Man as He is perfect God. “He is God, begotten before all ages from the substance of the Father; and He is Man born from the substance of His Mother in time.” Such is the wording of the Athanasian Creed. That union whereby the Second Person of the Blessed Trinity thus took to Himself human nature, uniting it to the Divine nature, under His single Personality, we call the Hypostatic Union. And from this it follows, as the Holy See declares, that “‘not only is Christ to be adored

Page 31

    THE ETERNAL KING 13 as God by angels and men, but also angels and men mut be subject to His empire as Man.” The reason is apparent at a glance. As soul and body constitute one man, so God and Man constitute one Christ, without confusion of natures, but with singleness of Person. So intimate is this union that even the human operations of Christ are themselves both human and Divine. Considered as performed by the human nature they are human, but being at the same time the actions of the Second Person of the Blessed Trinity they must also be Divine. Owing, therefore, to the HypoSstatic Union Christ possesses a dignity which demands no less than that every power compatible with the end of the Incarnation should be ascribed to Him as Man. Such a power is His universal Kingship over angels and men, and His complete ownership of all created things. But there is Still a second reason why Christ is universal King of all mankind. It is to be found in the right acquired over us by purchase. “Buying back’—that is the meaning of the word Redemption. At a “great price,” indeed, He bought us back when we were lost through sin. The ransom paid for us was no less than His own Precious Blood. “You were not redeemed with corruptible things, as gold and silver,” the Scripture solemnly reminds us, “but with the Precious Blood of Christ, as of a lamb unspotted and undefiled.” (I Peter 1, 18, 19.)

Page 32

    14 - THE REIGN OF CHRIST The Kingship which thus belongs to Christ is both spiritual and temporal. Regarding the spiritual aspect of Christ’s Kingdom the Encyclical already quoted leaves little to be added: “This Kingdom is in a special manner spiritual and concerned with spiritual things. In fact on more than one occasion when the Jews and even the Apostles themselves erroneously thought that Christ would establish liberty for the people and restore the kingdom of Israel, He deprived them of this vain opinion and hope. “Proclaimed King by a surrounding multitude of admirers, He deprecated both the name and the honor, by fleeing and hiding himself from them. Before the Roman Governor He declared His Kingdom to be not of this earth. It is a Kingdom, as described in the Gospels, into which men may prepare to enter by doing penance, into which they cannot enter except by faith and Baptism. That Baptism, though an exterior rite, signifies nevertheless and effects interior regeneration. “This Kingdom is opposed only to that of Satan and the powers of darkness, and it requires of its citizens not only that with minds detached from riches and earthly goods they cultivate refinement of morals, and thirst and hunger after justice, but also that they deny themselves and take up their cross.” To deliver us from the slavery of Satan is the spiritual purpose of the warfare waged by the Kingdom of Christ on earth, that so, by voluntary obedience, we may ad.

Page 33

    THE ETERNAL KING 15 vance continually in the service of our true Lord and King, enjoying in all the fulness of its supernatural riches the freedom of the children of God. In words of winsome grace and touching affection the great Apostle St. Paul expressed this thought when he wrote to the Colossians exhorting them to give thanks to God the Father, “who hath made us worthy to be partakers of the lot of the Saints in light; who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the Kingdom of the Son of His love.” (Col. i, 12, 13.) Yet in stressing in a special manner the spiritual nature of this Kingdom, we must not overlook the temporal kingship and dominion which equally belong to Christ as Man. “All power is given Me in heaven and on earth,” are the words in which Christ Himself announces His complete supremacy, temporal no less than spiritual. (Matt. xxviii, 18.) Obviously it is as Man that this power is given Him, for as God He possesses all plentitude of power from eternity. Here on earth He merely did not choose to exercise His supreme authority over all men and His entire ownership of all things, including every form of all material wealth and possession. On this point of Christ’s temporal empire, too, the Encyclical of Pope Pius XI is clear beyond all possibility of misunderstanding: “Tt is a shameful thing to deny to Christ, as Man, empire over any civil matter, whatsoever it may be. Since He has from the Father the most absolute right over

Page 34

    16 ‘ ‘THE REIGN OF CHRIST created things, in such wise that all are placed in His power. However, as long as He lived on earth He abStained from exercising such dominion. Although He despised the possession of human things and the effort to acquire them, yet He allowed and Still’ allows them to their possessors.”” Long ago the same doétrine, now so plainly set forth by the Holy See in its pronouncements on the spiritual and temporal power of Christ as Man, was no less clearly expressed within the Church. Vasquez and other great theologians held that Christ as Man possessed not merely the fulness of spiritual power, but complete temporal sovereignty as well: Jus regis temporalis super omnia— “the right of a temporal king over all things,” although He did not choose to exercise it. With equal correctness leading theologians went Still further and ascribed to Christ what indeed no other king could ever dream of acquiring: Jus dominit in singulas res mundi, “the right of ownership over every single thing on earth,” admitting that it was exercised by Him in regard to a few things only. Suarez and Lugo defended this opinion. Both these rights, as here described, the right namely of complete temporal sovereignty over all men and the right of complete temporal ownership over all things on earth, the Church now assures us are to be universally acknowledged in Christ the King, as Man, undiminished by one title, untarnished by one doubt. But that

Page 35

    THE ETERNAL KING 17 as God these rights belong to Him has always Stood beyond controversy. In brief, what the teaching of the Church on the royalty of Christ, as Man, implies is that all things are absolutely His possession and at His free disposal. Kings, rulers, executives are all His subjects and exercise their authority by His permission only. The wealth of factory, field and mine is equally His own. All capital, under whatsoever form, belongs to Him, and can be used by men only in Stewardship to Him. Yet it is not Christ’s purpose to interfere continually, by miraculous interventions, in this terrestrial order of things. Both authority and capital can therefore be abused, as they frequently are, without necessarily provoking any immediate interference on His part. No slightest recognition may even be given to His Kingship and Ownership. With God there is no need of haste. Surely and suddenly the great day of reckoning will come, when Christ’s sovereignty shall stand confirmed in the eyes of all the world and a full account must be given. Then will all justice be fulfilled by Him, and those who now deride His patience shall know His power. The power of Christ as King is really threefold: legislative, judicial, and executive. If even one of these elements were missing, as the Holy See declares, there would no longer be a true and real supremacy. “The Holy Gospels not only telll us that Christ pro 

Page 36

    18 ee THE REIGN OF CHRIST mulgated laws, but they also present Him in the very act of making them. . . . Christ Himself affirmed in the