 are distributed through her love. For, says the same great Pontiff, “nothing, God so wishing it, is granted us, save through Mary.” What a glorious vision, then, unfolds itself before our eyes as we Stand at the vantage point of eternity and see, as we can feebly imagine it, in the Eternal Mind of

Page 154

    128 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST God, all these glories, all these privileges, all this grandeur, all this wealth of tenderness and beauty, all this world of goodness and grace that is Mary—and all flowering forth out of the one great primal grace of the Immaculate Conception! But how can we appreciate what this in reality means for us! Through the decree of the Immaculate Conception, eternally ordained by God, we behold as through an arch of gold the great vista of the glory destined for us and all mankind. Through it we see the everlasting triumph of the saints in that Kingdom thrown open to us by His victory over sin and death whose very coming was conditioned on the Immaculate Conception. Yet the first fruit of His precious Passion and Death was the Immaculate Conception itself of Mary, preserved from every Stain of original sin through the foreseen merits of her Divine Son, Jesus Christ, both her Child and her Redeemer. : So with the Incarnation was decreed the Immaculate Conception, and through the Immaculate Conception came to us a Mother and a Saviour—and with them all our bliss! What wonders then, within a wonder, is the Immaculate Conception! What love and what confidence should it imply in our hearts for her who is the Mother of God, Our Mother and Our Queen!

Page 155

Page 156

    The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.78% accurate
    i rl a aa —* 4 , md oe ae aia eo. as! Sy ay tits © a

Page 157

    THE REASON FOR ST. JOSEPH’S POWER F. Albani

Page 158

Page 159

    nay eee’ ee ee eee guias® » Ty ie owe ee THE GREAT PATRON 1. JOSEPH’S POWER AND EXALTATION . ARY is Queen Mother at the court of the celestial King, her Divine Son and Saviour, but Joseph is our special Patron at His Throne. The dignity, power and unspeakable exaltation of this Saint in Christ’s Kingdom we find beautifully prefigured in the position occupied at the court of Pharaoh by Joseph of Egypt. Yet what, in the eyes of faith, are all the vanished splendors of the mightiest of Egyptian monarchs compared with the eternal reign of that Divine King before whom Joseph holds his lofty rank! For a true understanding of Joseph’s relationship to Jesus and Mary, and therefore of his sublime dignity, we need but turn to the pages of the Sacred Scriptures as these are illumined in the light cast on them by the Fathers of the Church. But the power of Joseph is made still more apparent by his relationship also to the Kingdom of Christ here upon earth. We recall that solemn act of the Vicar of Christ proclaiming the Spouse of Mary and FosterFather of Our Lord, Patron of the Universal Church, Christ’s Kingdom on this earth. 131

Page 160

    132 ‘ THE REIGN OF CHRIST And Still more has the Church done to indicate the power of Joseph. Not merely does she present him to us as holding a position of trust over Christ’s spiritual Empire here below similar to that conferred on the Egyptian Joseph over the regions watered by the Nile, but she continually repeats to us, in a far more significant way than when used of old, the words of Pharaoh to his subjects in their need: “‘Go to Joseph.” In discussing, therefore, Christ’s Kingdom and Dominion nothing can be more appropriate and impor: tant than to consider also, after Mary’s queenship, the position occupied in the Messianic Kingdom by that great Saint who himself was of kingly line, Joseph, the princely scion of the royal house of David, the faithful Proteétor and watchful Guardian of the promised Ruler, who was to reign in the house of Jacob forever and of whose Kingdom there would be no end. Devotion to St. Joseph is truly a Scriptural devotion. It is based entirely on the inspired word of God. The Holy Spirit is the first promoter of the veneration which the Church gives to this great Patriarch and Saint, who is the golden link between the Old TeStament and the New. To arouse within our hearts that love for St. Joseph which every Christian should seek to foster, and which the Church so eagerly desires of us, we need search no further than the pages of Holy Writ. In them we behold him standing forth as the elect of

Page 161

    THE GREAT PATRON 133 God, a man of angelic chastity, of perfect justice and of unswerving faith, to whom the two most precious treasures of Heaven were entrusted. There we behold him, exalted to the sublime dignity of head of the Holy Family, representing for Jesus the shadow of the Eternal Father, and for Mary the most chaste reflection of the Divine purity of her invisible Spouse, the Holy Ghost. With gentle sway he ruled over Him whom all creation must obey, and lovingly trained to humble toil the willing hands of that Divine Worker by whose omnipotence the universe was fashioned. Then, when the long day’s work was done and the sun sank in the blazing west, Mary, with true wife’s tender care, ministered to him in the sweet affection of her own devoted love. Who ever Stood in such familiar relations with the King of kings or was linked in so close a bond to her who is the Queen of angels and of men? And let us remember that even then those very titles, though not used by Christ and Mary, in all truth belonged to them, for they were based on the MyStery of the Incarnation. How wonderful in this light the réle played by that kingly scion, Joseph, in the lowly home of Nazareth, which was at the same time a royal court of Heaven where angels worshiped invisibly! To Joseph as well as to Mary an angel committed the function of exercising a parent’s right in giving the name of Jesus, “Saviour,” to the Divine Child. But to Joseph alone, as supreme authority and ruler of that home of

Page 162

    134 THE REIGN OF CHRIST all holiness, the angelic messenger was sent to make known the will of Heaven regarding the Child and His Mother: “Arise, and take the Child and His Mother and fly into Egypt, and be there until I shall call thee.” (Matt. 1i, 13.) So here again we behold him beautifully prefigured by that Joseph of Egypt who under Heaven’s guidance preserved for the people of Pharaoh and for his own brethren the grain that saved them in the days of famine. Yet far more than all this did Joseph when at the Angel’s bidding he fled with the Divine Child and His Mother to rescue the Saviour King. Not for one country, nor for one time only, but for all the world and for all generations, for Christ’s universal Kingdom to the end of time, he preserved the true Bread of Life, which in the Eucharist is our food unto life eternal. Perhaps the fullest revelation of the tender intimacy existing in that Holy Family is given us in the Gospel record of those words of Mary when, after long and heart-breaking search, the parents of Jesus at last found the Divine Child in the Temple: “Son, why hast Thou done so to us? Behold, Thy father and I have sought Thee sorrowing.” (Luke ii, 48.) Christ, who both before and after this event was completely subject to Joseph and to Mary, had on this occasion carried out a special dispensation of the Eternal Father. His aétion, as we know, was meant for all time to come, as a lesson in vocation. But it is not to this fa¢t I wish here to allude,

Page 163

    THE GREAT PATRON 135 but to the light cast by the words of Mary on the relations existing in the Holy Family itself. “Son!” By this name both parents, evidently called Christ. For Mary immediately adds: “Thy father and I,” referring to St. Joseph, who therefore was simply called by the tender name of “Father.” This conforms, too, with the Scripture usage of calling Joseph and Mary “the parents” of Jesus. That Mary conceived of the Holy Ghost alone the Scripture makes perfectly clear, but nevertheless Joseph was truly entitled to the name of “Father.” We here touch on a profound truth which should be carefully pondered and understood, and which redounds unspeakably to the glory of St. Joseph. Indeed it helps us to realize, as nothing else could, the position of Joseph in relation to the Divine King, and the high place occupied by him in the Kingdom of Christ on earth. It enables us even to glimpse in some faint way the vision of that glory which will be his forever in the Kingdom Triumphant of his Divine “Son.” We may well, therefore, consider here in some detail the faét of Joseph’s relation to the Eternal King.

Page 164

Page 165

    THE GREAT PATRON 2. JOSEPH’S RELATION TO CHRIST THE KING Although we are accustomed to refer to St. Joseph as the FoSter-Father of Jesus, which is entirely correét, yet it must not be thought that therefore he was only an assumptive, or adoptive, or even a merely legal father of Jesus; for this would be entirely untrue. He did not adopt Jesus, but Jesus was given to him by the Holy Ghost, as his true Son, not according to the flesh but according to the spirit. Joseph was both the legal father and juridically the natural father of Jesus, whom Christ was bound to obey according to the law of nature, since He truly belonged to Joseph within a natural and perfect marriage. To the same effect St. Augustine says of the marriage of Joseph and Mary: “Because of this inviolate union both deserved to be called the parents of Christ, so that not Mary only was Mother, but Joseph also was father of Christ, being the husband of the Mother of Christ. Yet both these funétions were his in mind and not in the flesh.” (De nupt. et concup., I, 11.) Let us note how the same great luminary of the Church, St. Augustine, further clarifies this truth: 137

Page 166

    138 | ‘THE REIGN OF CHRIST “What the Holy Spirit wrought, He wrought for both, namely for Mary and Joseph. . . . Resting in the justice of both, He gave unto both a Son. . . . Wherefore Joseph was all the more truly a father, as he was more chastely a father. . . . Not from the seed of Joseph did the Lord come, although so it was thought, and yet none the less to the fidelity and love of Joseph a Son was born of Mary.” (Serm. 51.) There, then, we have the substance of it all. The marriage of Joseph and Mary was ordained by God that within it might be born the Incarnate Word of God, Christ, the Immortal King of Ages. Let us sum up, then, what has here been said. Although conceived by Mary only, of the Holy Ghost, the Divine Son nevertheless belonged to Joseph also, being born in his wedded union. Both were truly the parents of Jesus, and He acknowledged this fact by being subject alike to both. ““Wherefore,” St. Augustine well concludes, “Joseph was all the more truly a father as he was more chastely a father.” Now let us Strive to realize what follows from the great truth of Joseph’s fatherhood of Chris. It means that Joseph, with Mary, was lifted up into a sphere entirely apart from all others, inaccessibly exalted even above the sublime dignity of the Apostles or the highest soarings of the angelic hierarchies. The seven Spirits before the Throne cannot draw so close to God. In a word, Joseph was thus elevated into the very order

Page 167

    ASS THE GREAT PATRON 139 of the Hypostatic Union, that order which draws its supereminent excellence from the union of the Divine Word with our human nature. Three persons only are included in this sublimes of all orders: Jesus, Mary, Joseph. Together they constitute what has often been called the “Earthly Trinity,” which through Christ, as God and Man, is linked direétly with the Eternal Trinity of Heaven. With this said, all is said. We can conceive nothing higher regarding the unimaginable dignity of Joseph, whose relationship is with the Immaculate Mother of God, and with the Eternal Son of God. And this relationship is true and real, exalting him with Mary to that dazzling nearness to God in which we have beheld him. After these faéts have been fully grasped we surely need search no farther to eStablish St. Joseph’s intimate relations to the Kingship and Kingdom of Christ. Yet a brief reference at least should be made here to his own personal sanctity. To enter into details on this vast subject would be impossible, but there is one general rule whereby we can safely measure the height of holiness to which Joseph was lifted up. It is a rule universally acknowledged in the schools, and which St. Bernardine of Sienna thus briefly sets forth for us: “The general rule for every single grace accorded any rational creature is that, wheresoever the Divine Bounty chooses some one for a particular and exceptional grace,

Page 168

    140 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST or for some sublime State, it also endows him with all the gifts necessary for the fulfilment of his functions, and enriches him superabundantly.” By this rule, therefore, we are to measure, if we can, the sanétity that would be required superabundantly to fit St. Joseph for the incomprehensible dignity and the sublime duties accorded him in his intimate relation to Christ the King and as linked in the bonds of true matrimony with Mary, the Queen of all the world and Mistress of the angels. By this rule we may try at least to ascertain in some degree what was the fidelity, the purity, the meekness and humility, and the sum of all the other virtues hidden under the silence of that wonderful Saint from whose lips the Sacred Scriptures record no single word, but whose life was filled with action, prayer, self-oblation, and complete devotion to the service of Jesus and of Mary, until at length it was wholly consumed with its ardor of Divine love. How keen must have been that fire of love kindled in the heart of Joseph, and mingling forevermore with the love that burned in the Hearts of Jesus and of Mary, less brilliant only than the ardor of these flames and blending forever in one brightness with them!

Page 169

    id \ v THE GREAT PATRON a: PATRON OVER ALL CHRIST’S KINGDOM Here, then, we come in a more special way to St. Joseph’s function in the Kingdom of Christ, God’s Holy Church. The providential mission of this great and many-sided Saint was not only the care and guardianship of the Holy Family on earth; but the same fatherly solicitude was to be exercised by him also in our own regard, as our Patron in Heaven. For that reason God gave him a heart large enough in its love to enclose and father all. As children of the Church, members of Christ’s Mystic Body, we naturally turn for protection to him under whose guardianship Jesus Himself had been placed. As children of Mary, we feel that we too may like Christ rely on Joseph, as a father who will never forsake us and of whose help we can always rest assured. Finally, nothing in the Kingdom of Christ on earth can be indifferent to him who so faithfully cherished and preserved the Divine King. He is indeed the mighty advocate for us with Mary and with Christ. All this the Church teaches us by ceaselessly applying to him the words already quoted at the beginning of this section: “Go to Joseph.” I4I

Page 170

    142 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST By typically referring these words to the great FosterFather of Our Saviour, the Patron set over Christ’s universal Kingdom, the Church implies that in following her counsel we can confidently count on St. Joseph’s help. Her direétion, so clearly given, cannot leave us disappointed. ‘“‘Go to Joseph,” spoken on her part, connotes no less plainly the obvious conclusion: “And he will aid you.” Of that aid let us have no doubt. Into the hands of Joseph of Egypt were placed all the keys to the granaries of Pharaoh, but into the hands of our own St. Joseph are given the keys to the treasuries of Heaven. Nothing can be denied him by the King, his Divine “Son,” while Mary, the sole dispenser of all Christ’s graces, will add her intercession to whatever Joseph may desire. ““Thy father and I,” is the appeal she will again make with him to Christ in those words of long ago. Nothing, then, can be refused to Joseph. But neither, let it be understood, can he ask anything for us that would not be pleasing to the Heart of the celestial King. Safely can we place into his hands ourselves, our interests, and all that is dear to us here below or in the life to come. Not for himself alone was St. Joseph exalted to that inconceivable height, where with Mary he is included in the order of the Hypostatic Union, but for ourselves also, and for all Christ’s Kingdom on this earth. How could the Holy See have better expressed its ap 

Page 171

    THE GREAT PATRON 143 preciation of this great truth than by declaring him Patron of the Universal Church and instituting in his honor the special Feast of the Solemnity of St. Joseph? Thus forevermore, by the voice of her Sovereign Pontiff, the Church has placed herself and all her faa under his protection. We can readily understand, therefore, why with such insistence she would have us turn to Joseph and exhorts us to love him, imitate him and confide in him. “‘We are exceedingly concerned,” wrote Pope Leo XIII, “that this devotion Strike deep root in the life and habits of the Faithful.” It need hardly be said that devotion to St. Joseph blends and harmonizes admirably with every form of devotion to Jesus and Mary. Going to Joseph we infallibly are brought to Jesus and Mary. So, too, devotion to him need not interfere with affection for our other heavenly patrons, whom we have learned to love and trust, as especially dear and near to us; nor least of all with that tender reverence and obedience we constantly owe to our own Guardian Angel, ever at our side. Devotion to St. Joseph may indeed greatly strengthen all these other bonds. As children of Mary, brothers of Jesus, members of Christ’s Mystic Body, entirely entrusted to St. Joseph’s Patronage, we are dear to him under many titles and he loves us with a manifold love. Let us, therefore, confidently go to him, knowing that he will take us

Page 172

    144 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST also to his great tender, fatherly heart, where Mary found her solace and the Christ Child sweetly rested, safe from every harm. Not merely is the entire Kingdom of Christ on earth placed under Joseph’s Patronage, but there is no State, age, or condition of life in which St. Joseph is not the fitting Patron. He touched on our human existence in all its phases. He was a scion of kings and yet a humble laborer; he was a protector of childhood, womanhood, virginity; he was a model and patron of family life, no less than of the priesthood and the Religious State. He is the special patron of the interior life and of all souls who aim after holiness. But his interest is no less intense in helping to bring back to God the fallen, the outcast and the wanderers from Heaven’s grace. Nothing so urges him as to restore all mankind to the Mother Heart of Mary and to the loving Heart of Christ, to make them all one in Jesus, that they may be one in God. There is no one who cannot call on him as a special patron, confide in him as a tender father, and love him as the one most near to Jesus and to Mary. There is no one who cannot copy the wisdom of St. Teresa, when she says: “I took St. Joseph for my patron and advocate, and I recommend myself unceasingly to his proteétion. I do not remember ever to have asked anything of him that I did not obtain. . . . St. Joseph assists us in every need.”

Page 173

Page 174

Page 175

    E KING TH SOE

Page 176

Page 177

    SACRED HEART AND ST. MARGARET MARY A Religious of the Sacred Heart

Page 178

Page 179

    THE HEART OF THE KING 1. REIGN OF THE SACRED HEART FORETOLD 4 ITH the institution of the Feast of Christ the King, and its annual celebration, culminat' ing always in the consecration of the entire human race to the Sacred Heart, the time has come for a renewed consideration of those remarkable revelations made to St. Margaret Mary, in her last days, regarding the social reign of the Sacred Heart. They are recorded in three letters written by her the year before her death. These documents were left unmentioned by her contemporaries. They were in fact ignored or entirely forgotten until re-discovered in modern times. Writing in 1874, Mgr. Bougaud compares them to those mysterious pages whose messages are traced with invisible characters that Stand out only when held to the flame. The fires of revolution, he observes, were needed to direct men to the obscurity of the archives where these documents lay hidden, and to render their revelations legible to all. It is true, indeed, that reference to the future reign of the Sacred Heart was already made in the very first year of the so-called Great Revelations, beginning in 1673. But its social nature was not as yet Stressed. 149

Page 180

    150 THE REIGN OF CHRIST “This is the last effort of My love once more to save the world,” Our Lord then said to St. Margaret Mary, disclosing His Sacred Heart to her. “By This I must reign. Yes, My Divine Heart shall reign!” But it was only at the very end of her life, in 1689, the year preceding her death, that the message of the reign of the Sacred Heart, in a distinctively social, national and even universal sense, was expressed by the Saint. Although of far more than merely national application, this message contained many things dire¢tly and immediately bearing upon Louis XIV and his court. Our Lord’s command to communicate them caused the Saint no little violence, as she herself States: “I should never have resolved to do so, had He not made known to me that it was for the interest of His glory, and for that I should cheerfully sacrifice millions of lives, if I had them.” It is of course in no way surprising that a mystic, secluded from the world and earthly interests, should be entrusted with a message to royalty, or even thrust into the very midst of secular turmoils. To the mystic Catharine of Sienna secular rulers came to receive counsel. Florence was reconciled by her to the Holy See and the Popes brought back from Avignon in despite of the bitterest opposition. To the mystic Joan of Arc the Voices spoke when she had reached her thirteenth year, and before long she found herself in camps and battles, until she Stood with lifted Standard viewing the achievement

Page 181

    THE HEART OF THE KING I51 of her task in the crowning of Charles VII at Rheims. To the mystic Teresa of Avila was given the occasion to address Philip II, who lent her his support, and we Still possess her correspondence with that King. So, then, we need not wonder that to the mystic Margaret Mary was assigned the duty of setting forth to Louis XIV and his court the sublime designs of the Sacred Heart. That mission failed, but through no fault of hers. Had it succeeded the whole course of modern history would doubtless have been entirely different from what it proved to be. Yet her message was not written in vain. It is full of encouragement and significance for us, particularly at the present time. The first of the three letters to which I have referred was dated February 23, 1689, and addressed to Mother de Saumaise. Its import is quite general. But a social and national note is Struck at once when she says that not only do those who promote devotion to the Sacred Heart win for themselves “the friendship and eternal benedictions of this lovable Heart,” but that they secure “a powerful protection for our country.” One thing, however, Stands out clearly: it is her absolute certainty of the future reign of the Sacred Heart. “The Sacred Heart,” she writes, “will reign in spite of Satan and all who may rise to oppose It.” And again, in her second letter, she says: “It will reign, this lovable

Page 182

    152 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST Heart, in spite of Satan, his imps and his agents. That word transports me with joy.” The final reign of the Sacred Heart on earth is thus not left to human contingency, but merely the time or manner of its fulfilment is left undefined. But she goes further and demands in particular now that this Heart should rule in the palaces of those possessed of power in this world. These naturally were then the kings and princes of that day. But her message was direétly to Louis XIV only. The example given by him would be most far-reaching in its influence. Not only is the King “to have an edifice ereéted in which shall be a picture of the Divine Heart where the consecration and homage of the King and his entire court can be received,”’ but he is to have the Mass of the Sacred Heart authorized by the Holy See and “‘to obtain all the other privileges which ought to accompany devotion to this Divine Heart.” Pére de la Chaise, the King’s confessor, is definitely named by the Saint as the person best suited to reach the ear of Louis XIV, although the great difficulties he will encounter through Satan’s opposition are not disguised. In fine we are prudently re-~ minded that God can indeed “effeét all that He pleases, though He does not always do so, not wishing to do violence to man’s will.” In that last sentence we may well find the ultimate reason why all these designs, so far as the King was concerned, failed of execution. We have only inferences to

Page 183

    THE HEART OF THE KING 153 guide us, but from these it is thought likely that the Saint’s message reached the King, that he believed it to be authentic, that he even gave it serious thought, but nothing happened in the event. For the rest the scandals of the King’s life are but too well known to us. Thus with the brilliant reign of Louis XIV began the decline that ended with Voltaire, Robespierre and Marat. The three letters of St. Margaret Mary, calling for the public, social, national reign of the Sacred Heart, were written in 1689. That date, Mgr. Bougaud points out, recalls another precisely one century later, 1789, “‘the epoch in which arose the Storm that was to sweep away the monarchy, and with it all other monarchies.” Yet amid the crashing of thrones and the hapless fate of earthly monarchs, the promise that Christ had made to St. Margaret Mary still remained: “Yes, My Divine Heart shall reign!” Devotion to the Sacred Heart triumphed over Jansenism; it Struggled through the dark years of heresy and infidelity, and today, at Montmartre, stands the national monument to the Sacred Heart that Louis XIV should have erected. But there is much more to tell. It was in 1899 that the great epoch-making event took place of the final dedication of the entire world— Catholic, Protestant, Jew and Infidel—to the Sacred Heart of Christ. Not merely a national, but a worldwide reign of that Heart was here proclaimed.

Page 184

Page 185

    THE HEART OF THE KING 2. “IN THIS SIGN CONQUER” “T am about to perform the greatest act of my pontificate,”’ were the words with which Pope Leo XIII announced his intention of consecrating the world to the Sacred Heart. He felt that in this aétion he was undertaking something of far higher significance, even from a social point of view, than anything hitherto accomplished by him during the long and glorious reign then. drawing to its close. In the devotion to the Divine Heart, and the consecration of mankind to this center of Christian love and unity, he beheld an assurance of future conquests no less splendid than the triumphs of the victorious Constantine with which a new era of freedom opened for the Church. In whatever light historians may view the vision of that resplendent cross in the heavens, which tradition records appeared to Constantine on the eve of his decisive battle, bearing the inscription, “In This Sign Conquer,” we know without doubt of the subsequent triumphs of the cross that led the way to victory for the Church. What that symbol meant