 act of consecration, by virtue of which we offer ourselves to God and become thereby, as it were, sacred to Him by reason of the sanctity which necessarily flows from an a¢t of consecration, as the Angelic Doétor teaches (“SummaTheol.” IIa-Ilae, q. 81, a. 8, c.),an act of expiation, by means of which all our faults are blotted out, lest perchance the sanctity of infinite Justice spurn our arrogant unworthiness and look upon our gift as something to be rejected rather than to be accepted. a ee ae Pa ee ig

Page 283

    ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 251 . All men are obliged to make reparation since, according to the teachings of our holy Faith, our souls have been disfigured, as a result of the pitiable fall of Adam, by original sin; we are subject also to our passions and corrupted in a truly sad way, and have thus made ourselves worthy of eternal damnation. It is true that the proud philosophers of this world deny the above truth, resurrecting in its place the ancient heresy of Pelagius which conceded to human nature a certain inborn goodness which, by our own powers, raises us up to ever higher levels of perfection. These false theories, born of human pride, have been condemned by the Apostle who admonishes us that “we were by nature children of wrath” (Eph. ii, 3). As a matter of fact, from the very creation of the world mankind has recognized, in one way or another, the obligation of making reparation, and impelled, as it were, by a natural instinct, has tried to placate the Deity by offering Him public sacrifices. TRUTH ANNOUNCED BY PSALMIST But no effort on our part would have been great enough to expiate the faults of men if the Son of God had not assumed human nature in order to redeem us. The Saviour of mankind announced this truth speaking through the Psalmist: “Sacrifice and oblation Thou wouldst not: but a body Thou hast fitted to Me. Holocausts for sin did not please Thee. Then said I: Behold I come” (Heb. xi, 5-7). In truth “He hath borne our

Page 284

    252 ; THE REIGN OF CHRIST infirmities and carried our sorrows: He was wounded for our iniquities” (Isaias liii, 4, 5), “who His own self bore our sins in His body on the tree” (I Peter ii, 24), “blotting out the handwriting of the decree that was against us, which was contrary to us, and He hath taken the same out of the way, fastening it to the cross” (Col. ii, 14), so “that we, being dead to sins, should live to justice” (I Peter ii, 24). . Though the ample redemption of Christ more than abundantly satisfied for all our offenses (Col. ii, 13), nevertheless, by reason of that marvelous disposition of Divine Wisdom by which we may complete those “things that are wanting of the sufferings of Christ in our own flesh, for His body, which is the Church” (Col. i, 24), we are able, in fact, we should add to the acts of praise and satisfaction which ‘“‘Chrigst in name of sinners has presented to God,” our own acts of praise and satisfaction. However, we must always remember that the expiatory value of our acts depends solely on the bloody sacrifice of Christ, which is renewed without interruption on our altars in an unbloody manner, since in both cases “the Victim is the same, the One who offers Himself by means of the ministry of the priesthood is the same, the very same One who offered Himself on the Cross, the only difference being in the manner in which the sacrifice is made” (Conc. Trid. Sess. xxii, c. 2). For this reason we must bring together, in the august sacrifice of the Blessed Eucharist, the aét of immolation made by

Page 285

    ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 253 the priest with that of the Faithful, so that they, too, may offer themselves up as “‘a living sacrifice, holy, pleasing unto God” (Rom. xii, 1). Therefore, St. Cyprian dared to affirm that “‘the sacrifice of Our Lord is not complete as far as our sanétification is concerned unless our offerings and sacrifices correspond to His passion” (Ep. 63, n. 381). The Apostle admonished us that “bearing about in our body the mortification of Jesus” (II Cor. iv, 10) and “buried together with him by Baptism unto death” (Rom. vi, 4), not only should we “crucify our flesh with the vices and concupiscences” (Gal. v, 24) “flying the corruption of that concupiscence which is in the world” (II Peter i, 4), but also that the “‘life of Jesus be made manifest in our bodies” (II Cor. iv, 10), and, having become partakers in His holy and eternal priesthood, we should offer up “‘gifts and sacrifices for sins’ (Heb. v, 1). For not only are they partakers in the mysteries of this priesthood and in the duty of offering sacrifices and satisfaction to God, who have been appointed by Jesus Christ the High Priest as the ministers of such sacrifices, to offer God “a clean oblation in every place from the rising of the sun even to the going down” (Malach, i, 10), but also those Christians called, and rightly so, by the Prince of the Apostles, “a chosen generation, a kingly priesthood” (I Peter ii, 9), who are to offer “‘sacrifices for sin” (Heb. v, 1) not only for themselves but for all mankind, and this in much the

Page 286

    254 ‘ THE REIGN OF CHRIST same way as every priest and “high priest taken from among men is ordained for men in the things that appertain to God” (Heb. v, 1). BENEFITS OF OBLATION AND SACRIFICE In the degree to which our oblation and sacrifice will the more perfectly correspond to the sacrifice of Our Lord, that is to say, to the extent to which we have immolated love of self and our passions and crucified our flesh in that myStical crucifixion of which the Apostle writes, so much the more plentiful fruits of propitiation and of expiation will we garner for ourselves and for others. A wondrous bond joins all the Faithful to Christ, the same bond which unites the head with the other members of the body, namely, the communion of saints, a bond full of mystery which we believe in as Catholics and by virtue of which individuals and nations are not only united to one another but likewise with the head itself, “who is Christ: from whom the whole body, being compacted and fitly joined together, by what every joint supplieth, according to the operation in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body, unto the edifying of itself in charity” (Eph. v, 15, 16). This, too, was the prayer which Jesus Christ Himself, the Mediator between God and men, at the hour of His death made to His Father, “I in them and Thou in Me: that they may be made perfect in one” (John xvii, 23). As the act of consecration proclaims and confirms our

Page 287

    ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 255 union with Christ, so the act of expiation, by purifying us from sins, is the beginning of such union; our participation in the sufferings of Christ perfects it; the offering we make to Him of our sacrifices for the welfare of our brethren brings such union to its final consummation. This was precisely the design of the mercy of Jesus when He unveiled to our gaze His Sacred Heart, surrounded by the emblems of His Passion, and aflame with the fire of love, that we, on the one hand, perceiving the infinite malice of sin, and on the other, filled with a knowledge of the infinite love of Our Redeemer, might detest more cordially sin and substitute for it an ardent love of Him. The spirit of expiation or of reparation has always played one of the chief rdles in the devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. Certainly, reparation is most consonant, with the origin, nature, efficacy, and particular practices of this special devotion, a fact confirmed by history and the customs of the Faithful, by the sacred liturgy, and by the official documents of Roman Pontifts. As a matter of fact, on the occasion when Jesus revealed Himself to St. Margaret Mary, though He then insisted on the immensity of His love, at the same time, with sorrowful mien, He grieved over the great number of horrible outrages heaped upon Him by the ingratitude of mankind. He used then these words, words which should be graven on the hearts of all pious souls so as never to be forgotten by them: “Behold this Heart which has loved men so much, which has heaped upon them so

Page 288

    256 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST many benefits. In exchange for this infinite love It finds ingratitude; instead It meets with forgetfulness, indifference, outrages, and all this at times even from souls bound closely to It in the bonds of a very special love.” COMMUNION OF REPARATION URGED In order to make reparation for such faults, He, among other requests, made this special request as one which would be most acceptable to Him, namely, that the Faithful, inspired by the intention of making reparation, should receive Holy Communion—and for this reason it is called the “Communion of Reparation”—and for an hour should practise acts and prayers of reparation— which devotion is rightly called the ““Holy Hour.” The Church has not only approved these devotions but has enriched them with very special spiritual favors. But how can we, one may ask, believe that Christ reigns happily in Heaven if it is possible to console Him by such acts as those of reparation? We answer in the language of St. Augustine, words quite apposite to our subject: “The soul which truly loves will comprehend what I say” (In Ioan. Evang. Tract. xxvi, 4). Every soul which burns with true love of God, if it but turns its thoughts to the past, sees in meditation and can contemplate Jesus suffering for mankind, afflicted by grief in the midst of sorrows suffered “for us men and for our salvation,” weighed down by agony and re 

Page 289

    VS iN ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 257 proaches, “bruised for our sins” (Isaias liii, 5), in the very act of healing us by His bruises. With so much the more understanding can pious souls meditate upon these mysteries if they appreciate that the sins and crimes of men, no matter when committed, were the real reason why the Son of God was condemned to death and that even sins committed now would be able of themselves to cause Christ to die a death accompanied by the same sufferings and agonies as His death on the cross, since every sin must be said to renew in a certain way the Passion of Our God, “crucifying again to themselves the Son of God and making Him a mockery” (Heb. vi, 6). And if, in view of our own future sins, foreseen by Him, the soul of Jesus became sad even unto death, there can be no doubt that by His prevision at the same time of our acts of reparation He was in some way comforted when “there appeared an angel from heaven” (Luke xxii, 43) to console that Heart of His bowed down with sorrow and anguish. At the present time, we too, in a marvelous but no less true manner, may and ought to console that Sacred Heart which is being wounded continually by the sins of thoughtless men, since—and we read this also in the sacred liturgy—Chris&t Himself grieved over the fact that He was abandoned by His friends. For He said, in the words of the Psalmist, “My heart hath expected reproach and misery. And I looked for one that would grieve together with Me, but there was none: and for one

Page 290

    258 THE REIGN OF CHRIST that would comfort Me, and I found none” (Psalm Ixviii, 21). RECALLS AUGUSTINE’S WORDS To the above we may add that the expiatory passion -of Jesus Christ is renewed and in a certain manner continued in His mystic body, the Church. To use again the words of St. Augustine, “Christ suffered all that He had to suffer: nothing at all is lacking to the number of His sufferings. Therefore His sufferings are complete, but in Him as in the head; there remain even now the sufferings of Christ to be endured in the body” (Psalm Ixxxvi). In fact, Christ Himself made the same statement, for to Saul “breathing out threatenings: and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord” (Adts ix, 1), He said, “I am Jesus whom thou persecutest’”’ (Acts ix, 5). By this He plainly affirmed that persecutions visited on the Church are in reality directed against the Head of the Church. Therefore, Christ, suffering in His mystical body, with reason desires to have us as companions in His own acts of expiation. He asks to be united with us for since we “‘are the body of Christ and members of member’’ (I Cor. xii, 27), in so far as the Head suffers so also should the members suffer with it (I Cor. xii, 26). CHURCH OPPOSED BY GOVERNMENTS Now, anyone who uses his eye and mind, if he but think of this world “seated in wickedness” (I John vy,

Page 291

    ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 259 19), can see, as We Stated above, how urgent, especially in our own times, is the need of expiation or of reparation. There come to Our ears from every side the cries of nations, whose rulers or governments have actually risen up and have conspired together against the Lord and against His Church (Cf. Psalm ii, 2). We have seen both human and Divine rights overthrown in these countries, churches destroyed to their very foundations, religious and consecrated virgins driven from their homes, thrown into prison, made to go hungry, treated with unspeakable savagery. We have seen troops of boys and girls, torn from the bosom of Holy Mother Church, made to deny and blaspheme Christ, and urged to commit the worst sins against purity. We have seen a whole Christian people menaced, oppressed, in constant peril of _ apostasy from the Faith or of a moét barbarous death. ‘These happenings, sorrowful as they are, seem to have been foreseen in such calamities as are now occurring, and to anticipate “the beginning of those sorrows” which will be revealed by “the man of sin who is lifted above all that is called God or that is worshipped” (II Thes. Nor is that other spectacle, Venerable Brothers, less sad that even among the Faithful, washed as they have | been by Baptism in the Blood of the Innocent Lamb and enriched by His grace, we encounter so many of every Station in life who, ignorant of things Divine, are potsoned by false doétrines and live a sinful life far from

Page 292

    260 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST their Father’s house, without the light of the true Faith, without the joy of hope in a future life, deprived of the Strength and comfort which come with the spirit of love. Of them one may say quite truthfully that they are immersed in darkness and in the shadow of death. Moreover, disrespect for the discipline of the Church is on the increase among the Faithful as also disrespect for ancient traditions, upon which the Christian life has been built, by which domestic society is governed, by which the sanctity of marriage is protected. The process of educating youth has been weakened or spoiled by too much effeminacy, and even the right to educate children in their religion has been taken away from the Church. Christian modesty is forgotten, sad to say, both in our manner of life and of dress, especially by women. There has come into existence, too, an uncontrollable desire to possess the base things of this world, an unreasonable regard for civil interests, an intemperate searching after popular applause, a despisal of legitimate authority and of the Word of God, by all of which the Faith itself is shaken to its foundations or placed in jeopardy. HOUR OF PROPHECY ARRIVED There must be added to this accumulation of evils the sloth and laziness of those who, like the Apostles asleep or like those disciples who had fled away, since they are not firmly rooted in the Faith, have shamefully abandoned Christ, burdened with sorrows and attacked cS ao ie a 4 a

Page 293

    ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 261 by the satellites of Satan, as well as the perfidy of those others who, following in the footsteps of Judas the traitor, either with sacrilegious temerity approach Holy Communion or go over to the camp of the enemy. There thus comes to mind, almost involuntarily, the thought that we have arrived at the hour prophesied by Our Lord when He said: ‘“‘And because iniquity has abounded, the charity of many shall grow cold” (Matt. xxiv, 12). If the Faithful, burning with love for the suffering Christ, should meditate on all these considerations, it would be unthinkable that they should not expiate with greater zeal both their own and the faults of others, that they should not repair the honor of Christ, be filled with zeal for the eternal salvation of souls. Assuredly, We may adapt to our own age to describe it what the Apostle wrote: “When sin abounded, grace did more abound” (Rom. v, 20), for even though the sinfulness of man has greatly increased, by the grace of the Holy Ghost, there has also increased the number of the Faithful who most gladly try to make satisfaction to the Divine Heart of Jesus for the numerous injuries heaped on Him. What is more, they joyfully offer themselves to Christ as victims for sin. Anyone who has been considering in a spirit of love all that has been recalled to his mind up to this, if he has impressed these thoughts, as it were, upon the fleshy tablets of his heart, such a one assuredly cannot but abhor and flee all sin as the greatest of evils. He will

Page 294

    13 aa THE REIGN OF CHRIST also offer himself whole and entire to the will of God " and will Strive to repair the injured majesty of God by constant prayer, by voluntary penances, by patient suffering of all those ills which shall befall him; in a word, he will so organize his life that in all things it will be inspired by the spirit of reparation. From this spirit of reparation there have been born many families of religious men and women, who, day and night, in tireless manner, have set before themselves the task of taking, in as far as that is possible, the place of the Angel who comforted Jesus in the garden. Likewise, certain pious associations, approved by the Holy See and enriched with indulgences, have as their ideal to make reparation for sin by means of certain practices of piety and of the virtues. And not to speak of all these holy works, We select out one for mention, namely, the frequent practice of making solemn reparation not only by individuals but often by whole parishes, dioceses, and even nations. DESIRES DEVOTION TO BE GENERAL Venerable Brothers, just as the aét of consecration, which began in a small way and afterwards came into general use, achieved, by reason of Our approval, the splendid purposes and ends desired, so We wish ardently that this devotion of reparation, which has already been introduced and is the pious custom of certain places, possess the seal of highest approval of Our Apostolic

Page 295

    ey ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 263 authority, so that it likewise may come to be prattised universally and in a most solemn manner by all Christian peoples. We eStablish, therefore, and We order that annually, on the Feast of the Sacred Heart, in all the churches of the world, there take place a solemn act of reparation (the same formula must be used by all and is the one attached to this Encyclical *) to our most loving Redeemer, in order that we may, by this aét, make reparation for our own sins and may repair the rights which have been violated of Christ, the King of Kings and our most loving Master. Nor can We doubt, Venerable Brothers, that from this holy praétice now reéstablished and extended to the whole Church We may expect many signal blessings, not only for individuals but for society itself, domestic and civil, since Christ Himself promised to St. Margaret Mary that “He would shower abundantly His graces upon those who rendered this honor to His Sacred Heart.” Assuredly sinners “looking on Him whom they pierced” (John xix, 37), Stricken by the sorrow of the Church, detesting the injuries offered to the King of Kings ‘“‘will return to themselves” (Isaias xlvi, 8), for they cannot become obStinate in sin in the presence of Him whom they have wounded “coming in the clouds of heaven’ (Matt. xxvi, 64), for then too late and without hope, shall they “bewail themselves of Him” (Apoc. i, 7). * This formula will be found on page 203 of this volume.

Page 296

    264 THE REIGN OF CHRIST But the just will “‘be justified still and the holy will be justified still” (Apoc. xxii, 11). They will consecrate themselves with renewed ardor to the service of their King. Seeing Him so despised and so often attacked, seeing too that so many injuries are inflicted on Him, certainly their zeal for the salvation of souls will be increased when they hear the lament of the Divine Victim, “What profit is there in My Blood?” (Psalm xxix, 10) and, at the same time, they will meditate upon the joy of the Sacred Heart “‘over the sinner who doth penance” (Luke xv, 7). PRAYER FOR GOD’S MERCY We, before all other things, hope and greatly desire that the justice of God, which would have pardoned Sodom if only ten just had been found therein, shall be exercised with more mercy towards all mankind. The Faithful, in union with Christ, the Mediator and our Head, will pray for and ask from God such mercy. May the most gracious Mother of God be propitious to these Our wishes and to these Our commands; she who gave us Christ the Redeemer, who watched over Him, and, at the foot of the Cross, offered Him a victim for our sins. She, too, by reason of her wondrous union with Him and of a most singular grace of God, became and is piously known as the Mother of Reparation. Confiding in her intercession with Jesus, “the one mediator pf God and man” (I Tim. ii, 5), who wished to asso 

Page 297

    ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 265 ciate his own Mother with Himself as the advocate of sinners, as the dispenser and mediatrix of grace, We impart from Our heart, as an augury of Divine favors and a proof of Our fatherly love, to you, Venerable Brothers, and to all the flock confided to your care, the Apostolic Blessing. Given at Rome, at St. Peter’s, the ninth of May, 1928, the seventh year of Our Pontificate. Prius XI.

Page 298

Page 299

    The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.00% accurate
    a

Page 300

Page 301

    thi

Page 302

Page 303

    The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.38% accurate
    : é "4 . ~* ‘ a a

Page 304

