 for ever and ever. Amen.

Page 238

Page 239

    TO THE SACRED HEART ACT OF CONSECRATION OF THE FAMILY TO THE SACRED HEART OF JESUS Formula prescribed March 1, 1918. A Plenary Indulgence can be gained on the day when this Consecration is first made and on each day of its renewal from year to year. to Saint Margaret Mary the desire of reigning in Christian families, we today wish to proclaim Thy most complete regal dominion over our own. We would live in future with Thy life, we would cause to flourish in our midst those virtues to which Thou hast promised peace here below, we would banish far from us the spirit of the world which Thou hast cursed; and Thou shalt reign over our minds in the simplicity of our faith, and over our hearts by the whole-hearted love with which they shall burn for Thee, the flame of which we shall keep alive by the frequent reception of Thy Divine Eucharist. Deign, O Divine Heart, to preside over our assemblings, to bless our enterprises, both spiritual and tem207 Ses HEART OF JESUS, who didst manifest

Page 240

    208 ‘ THE REIGN OF CHRIST poral, to dispel our cares, to sanctify our joys, to alleviate our sufferings. If ever one or other of us should have the misfortune to afflict Thee, remind him, O Heart of Jesus, that Thou art good and merciful to the penitent sinner. And when the hour of separation Strikes, when death shall come to cast mourning into our midst, we will all, both those who go and those who stay, be submissive to Thy eternal decrees. We will console ourselves with the thought that a day will come when the entire family, reunited in Heaven, can sing for ever Thy glories and Thy mercies. May the Immaculate Heart of Mary and the glorious Patriarch, St. Joseph, present this consecration to Thee, and keep it in our minds all the days of our life! All glory to the Heart of Jesus, our King and our Father! Amen. hae i bud, . ee

Page 241

    TO THE SACRED HEART ACT OF PERSONAL LOYALTY TO OUR KING | Prayer to Christ the King A Plenary Indulgence can be gained daily by the devout recitation of this prayer under the usual conditions—namely Confession, Communion, and prayers for the Holy Father’s intentions. (Sacred Penitentiary, February 21, 1923.) The translation is that approved by his Eminence Cardinal Hayes and issued by the Apostleship of Prayer. CHRIST JESUS, I acknowledge You as UniC) versal King. All that has been made, was created for You. Exercise over me all the rights that You have. I renew my baptismal promises, renouncing Satan, his pomps and his works, and I promise to live as a good Christian. Especially do I pledge myself by all the means in my power to bring about the triumph of the rights of God and of Your Church. Divine Heart of Jesus, I offer You my poor actions to obtain that all hearts may recognize Your consecrated Kingship and that thus the Kingdom of Your peace may be established in the whole world. Amen. 209

Page 242

    210 ‘ THE REIGN OF CHRIST Ejaculation to Christ the King An Indulgence of one hundred days each time. (Sacred Penitentiary, March 9, 1923.) ACRED HEART OF JESUS, our King, I love thee with Thy love for me and for the whole world!

Page 243

    ENCYCLICAL OF POPE PIUS XI ON THE FEAST OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, KING Quas Primas

Page 244

Page 245

    ENCYCLICAL OF POPE PIUS XI ON THE FEAST OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, KING * TO OUR VENERABLE BROTHERS, PATRIARCHS, PRIMATES, ARCHBISHOPS, AND BISHOPS AND ALL ORDINARIES IN PEACE AND COMMUNION WITH THE APOSTOLIC SEE PIUS XI GREETINGS AND THE APOSTOLIC BLESSING N the First Encyclical that We addressed to all the | Bishops of the Catholic world on the occasion of our elevation to the Supreme Pontificate, in which We outlined the principal causes of the calamities with which We saw mankind to be oppressed and harassed, We remember having Stated quite definitely that evil has spread throughout the world because the greater part of mankind banished Jesus Christ and His holy law from their lives, their families, and from public affairs, and that there never would arise a sure hope of lasting peace between the peoples of the world as long as individuals * Translated by Msgr. James H. Ryan, D.D., Ph.D., copyrighted by the N. C. W. C. News Service. 213

Page 246

    214 THE REIGN OF CHRIST and nations continued to deny or refused to acknowledge the rule of Christ, Our Saviour. As we warned at that time, it is necessary for all men to seek “the peace of Christ in the Kingdom of Christ.” We announced, too, that We would do everything possible to attain this, the purpose of our pontificate. We used the phrase “the Kingdom of Christ” because it seemed to Us that the eStablishment of peace could not be achieved except by a reStoration of the Kingdom of Our Lord. Meanwhile the beginning of a movement of the peoples of the earth towards Christ and His Church, from whom alone salvation can come, gave Us renewed hopes of better times. It was a movement in which We perceived that many who had hitherto despised the Kingdom of Christ and who had pra¢tically exiled themselves from their Father’s house were prepared and were even anxious to tread again the paths of obedience. LESSONS OF HOLY YEAR And should not all that has happened during this Holy Year, a year worthy of perpetual remembrance, increase the honor and glory of the Divine Founder of the Church, who is at the same time Our Supreme King and Lord? The Vatican Missionary Exposition has influenced most deeply the hearts and minds of men. It has made known the lasting work of the Church whose purpose it is to extend the Kingdom of her Spouse into

Page 247

    ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 215 every continent, even to the most remote islands of the seas. It has also shown the great number of countries won to Catholicism by the sweat and blood of courageous and self-sacrificing missionaries. In spite of this noble work many vast regions are yet to be added to the benign and saving rule of Our King. Those great multitudes who, during the Year of Jubilee, came from every part of the globe to the Holy City, led there by their bishops and priests, their hearts purified by the grace of the sacraments, what more noble thing could they do than proclaim themselves, both before the Tombs of the Apostles and before Us, faithful subjects of Christ, now and forever? This Kingdom of Christ appeared almo&t suffused with a new light when We raised to the honor of the altar six confessors and virgins whose heroic virtues had been amply demonStrated to all mankind. What joy, what comfort We experienced when, amidst the splendors of the Vatican Basilica, having promulgated the solemn decrees of their canonization, an immense multitude of people spontaneously raising their voices in a hymn of thanksgiving cried out: “Thou, O Christ, art the King of Glory.” Thus, while men and nations, alienated from God because of mutual hatred and internal discord, condemn themselves to ruin and to death, the Church of God continues to feed us with the food of the spiritual life. She Still creates and fashions generations of saints for Jesus Christ. He, on His side, does not cease to bring to

Page 248

    S10). THE REIGN OF CHRIST the joys of the Kingdom of Heaven those who had shown i themselves faithful and obedient subjects in His earthly _ Kingdom. Added to all this was the celebration of the Sixteenth Centenary of the Council of Nicea, which also occurred during this Jubilee Year. We desired that this Centenary should be worthily commemorated, and We Ourselves commemorated it in the Vatican Basilica, and this We did all the more willingly because the Holy Synod of Nicea had defined the dogma of the consubstantiality of the Son and the Father and had, at the same time, inserted in the Creed the formula, “of whose reign there will be no end.” In these words it proclaimed the royal dignity of Christ. This Holy Year, therefore, having manifested in more ways than one the Kingdom of Christ it seemed well to Us to do all that our Apostolic Office implies by closing it with the institution of a special feast for the liturgy in honor of Jesus Christ, the King. We did this, too, after many Cardinals, Bishops, and the faithful, both singly and collectively, had asked Us to do so. All these events gave Us so much joy that We are constrained to speak. You, Venerable Brothers, We ask to adapt that which we write about the cult of Jesus Christ, our King, to the intelligence of your people and to explain its full meaning to them so that much spiritual fruit may be derived from the annual celebration of this great Feast.

Page 249

    ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 217 CHRIST’S TITLES OF ROYALTY Since ancient times it has been customary to bestow upon Christ the title of King because of His lordship over all created things. As King, He reigns in the minds of men, not only because of the keenness of His mind or the vastness of His knowledge, but also because He is the Truth, and it is therefore necessary that all men seek and receive the truth from Him in full obedience. Likewise, He reigns in the will of men, either for the reason that in Him reside perfect command over and a complete submission of the human will to the behests of the Divine Will, or because by His holy inspiration He influences our free will in such an efficacious way that we are led to desire only the noblest things. Finally, He is recognized as the King of Our Hearts because of that love of His which surpasses all understanding (Eph. iii, 19) and also of the supreme attraction for us of His divine meekness and kindliness. No man, in fact, ever was so much loved as Jesus Christ, or ever will be. And in order to enter most intimately into the merits of the question We assert that it is necessary to vindicate for the Christ-man both the name and power of a King in the full meaning of that term. As a matter of fact, it is only of Him as man that it can be said that He has received “power, honor, and kingdom” from the Father (Dan. vii, 13-14). The reason for this is that since He is the Word of God, of the self-same substance as the Father, He must have in common with the Father all that pertains to the Divine

Page 250

    7 be eeamek THE REIGN OF CHRIST nature, and by consequence He possesses full and absolute sway over all created things. TESTIMONY OF HOLY SCRIPTURE Do we not often read in the Holy Scriptures that Christ is King? He is called the Prince who shall come out of Jacob (Num. xxiv, 19), who has been named by his father King of Sion, the Holy Mountain, who shall receive the Gentiles for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for his possession (Ps. ii, 8). In the Psalm of the Beloved in which under the image of a rich and powerful king is prefigured the future King of Israel, we read the words, “Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever: the sceptre of thy Kingdom is a sceptre of uprightness.” (Ps. xliv, 7.) Besides many other passages we may cite one which clearly portrays the character of Christ when it predicts that His kingdom will be from sea to sea and will be marked by the reign of justice and of peace. “In his days shall justice spring up and abundance of peace . . . he shall rule from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth” (Ps. Ixxi, 7-8). To the above testimonies must be added the Startling predidtion of the prophets, and in a special manner that most notable prophecy of Isaias: “For a Child is born to us, and a son is given to us, and the government is upon his shoulder; and his name shall be called, Wonderful, Counsellor, God the Mighty, the Father of the world to come, the Prince of Peace. His empire shall be multiplied, and there

Page 251

    ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 219 shall be no end of peace: he shall sit upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom; to establish it and. Strengthen it with judgment and with justice, from henceforth and for ever: the zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this” (ix, 6-7). The other prophets are in complete agreement with Isaias, and especially Jeremias when he foretold that a “Just Seed” would be born of the house of David, and that this Son of David “a King, shall reign and shall be wise; and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth” (xxiii, 5). Daniel, too, foretells the founding of a Kingdom by the Lord of Heaven who “will set up a kingdom that shall never be destroyed . . . it shall Stand forever” (ii, 44). “I beheld therefore,” continued the Prophet, “‘in the vision of the night, and lo, one like the son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and he came even to the Ancient of days: and they presented him before him. And he gave him power, and glory, and a kingdom: and all peoples, tribes and tongues shall serve him: his power is an everlasting power that shall not be taken away: and his kingdom that shall not be destroyed” (Dan. vii, 13-14). PREDICTIONS FULFILLED The writers of our Holy Gospels likewise recognize that in Christ was fulfilled the prediction of Zacharias concerning the “Meek King” when Jesus Christ, the Just One and the Saviour, rode upon an ass and upon a

Page 252

    220 : THE REIGN OF CHRIST colt, the foal of an ass (Zach. ix, 9) into Jerusalem amidst the acclamations of the multitude. This doétrine of Christ the King which We have taken from the very words of the Old Testament is duplicated in the New wherein it is confirmed in a most remarkable manner. For in the New Testament is contained the announcement of the Archangel informing the Virgin Mary that she shall conceive and bear a Son on whom God will bestow the throne of David, his progenitor, and that the new-born child will reign in the House of Jacob for all eternity, that His Kingdom shall be without end (Luke 1, 32-33). Christ Himself bears teStimony in His own words to the existence of His Kingdom. Thus, alike in His last discourse to the multitude when He spoke of the rewards and punishment which shall be meted out for all eternity to the just and the unjust; when He replied to the Roman Consul who publicly asked Him if He were a King; or when, after His resurrection He bestowed upon the Apostles the office of teaching and baptizing, Christ took every opportunity to call Himself a King (Matt. xxv, 31-40), and to publicly affirm His Kingship (John xviii, 37), to which had been confided all power both in heaven and on earth (Matt. xxviii, 18). Could He possibly have meant anything else by these words than that His regal power was absolute and that His Kingdom extended over all the earth? It should not surprise us, therefore, if He whom John called the “Prince of the kings of the earth” (Apoc. i, 5) when He appeared to the Apostles, as nar 

Page 253

    ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 221, rated in the vision of the Apocalypse, wore “on his garment and on his thigh written: King of Kings, and Lord of Lords” (xix, 16). Since the Eternal Father has made Christ His heir in all things (Hebr. i, 2), it is necessary that He should rule until the end of time, that is, until all His enemies are brought back captives to the very footstool of the throne of God (I Cor. xv, 25). As a result of this doctrine found in the Holy Scriptures, the Church, the Kingdom of Christ on this earth, and which by divine command is spread amongst all men and all nations, proclaimed Him her Founder in the annual cycle of the liturgy, as Sovereign Lord and King of Kings. In affectionate veneration for Christ she multiplies the titles of honor which she bestows upon Him. These same titles are expressed in manifold beautiful ways, as for example in the ancient Antiphonaries and Sacramentaries, in the Holy Office, and in the daily Sacrifice of the Immaculate Host in Mass. It is by this constant praise of Christ the King that is shown, too, the wonderful harmony which exists between our own Rite and that of the Eastern Churches, so much so that the axiom, legem credendi lex Statuit supplicand (“The law of prayer determines the law of belief’) takes on a deeper truth. BASIS SHOWN FOR ROYAL DIGNITY St. Cyril of Alexandria, writing on this subject, points out the basis for the royal dignity and power of Christ

Page 254

    222 THE REIGN OF CHRIST when he says, “He obtained the dominion over every creature not by force nor because of mere external reasons, but because of His very essence and nature” (Luk., 10). What he affirms is that the Royalty of Christ is founded solely on that admirable union in Him of two natures which we call the Hypostatic Union. From which truth it follows that Jesus Christ must not only be adored by angels and men as God, but that they must be subject to and obey Him as well, because He is Man: it is by reason of the fact of the Hypostatic Union, and that alone, that Christ has power over all creatures. What thought could be more beautiful and more inspiring than that Christ rules over us, not only by right of birth but also by right of conquest, brought about by His redemption of mankind? God desired forgetful man to recall at what a great price we were bought by Our Saviour. “Knowing that you were not redeemed with corruptible things as gold or silver, from your vain conversation of the tradition of your fathers: But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb unspotted and undefiled” (I Peter 1, 18-19). We, therefore, no longer belong to ourselves alone, for Christ has bought us with a “great price” (I Cor. vi, 20). Our bodies too “are the members of Christ” (I Cor. vi, 15). We now wish to outline the nature and importance of this supremacy of Christ. It consists of a threefold power, of which if even one element were missing, it would no longer contain the idea of a true and real supremacy.

Page 255

    ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 223 The text of the Sacred Scriptures that treat of the universal empire of Our Redeemer superabundantly prove what We have said. It is a dogma of faith that men have been given Jesus Christ as a Redeemer in whom they must believe and a lawmaker whom they must obey. The Holy Gospels not only tell us that Christ promulgated laws, but they also present Him in the very act of making them. Under different circumstances and in different words the Divine Master affirms that whosoever will keep His commandments gives proof thereby of loving Him and will remain in His love (John xiv, 15; xv, 10). Christ Himself affirmed in the presence of the Jews, who had accused Him of having violated the Sabbath by curing the paralytic, that the Father had given Him judicial power. “For neither doth the Father judge any man, but hath given all judgment to the Son” (John v, 22). By this we must understand that He had the right also of rewarding and punishing men even during their lives since this inheres in the power of judging. Executive power must equally be attributed to Christ, since it is necessary for all to obey His commands, and for none to escape them without meeting the punishments He eStablished. THIS KINGDOM CHIEFLY SPIRITUAL That this Kingdom is principally a spiritual one and to it belong spiritual things, the passages of the Holy Bible referred to above show, and Jesus Christ Himself

Page 256

    224 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST confirms by His deeds. On various occasions when the Jews and the Apostles themselves believed falsely that the Messiah would free the people and eStablish the Kingdom of Israel, He sought to dispel this vain hope from their minds. When He was about to be proclaimed King by the multitude that admiringly crowded about Him, He declined the title and honor, and retiring hid Himself in the desert. Finally, He announced before the Roman Consul that His Kingdom “was not of this earth.” In the Gospels this Kingdom is presented in the following manner: Men must prepare themselves to enter therein by means of penance and they cannot enter except through faith and through the Sacrament of Baptism, which though an external rite signifies and produces interior grace. This Kingdom is opposed only to the Kingdom of Satan and the powers of darkness. It requires from its subjects not only that their souls be detached from riches and worldly things; that they rule their lives, and that they hunger and thirst after justice, but also that they renounce themselves and take up their cross. Who does not see royal dignity in the spiritual character of Christ as Redeemer founding the Church by His blood, and of Christ as Priest offering Himself forever as a sacrifice of propitiation for the sins of men? Moreover, since Christ has received from the Father an absolute right over all created things, so that they all are subject to His will, they would err grievously who would take from the Christ-Man power over all temporal

Page 257

    ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 225 things. Yet, because on earth He abstained completely from exercising that power and despised possessions and the care of worldly things, so He has permitted and permits rightful possession of them, but He commands that the possessors must serve Him. The words “He does not take from us mortal things Who bestows upon us heavenly Kingdoms” (Hymn, Epiphany) are well adapted to show this. The dominion of the Redeemer embraces, therefore, all men, as was said in the words of Our Predecessor of lasting memory, Leo XIII, which We here make Our own: “The Empire of Christ extends not only over Catholic peoples and over those who, reborn in the fount of Baptism, belong by right to the Church, even though error has driven them far and dissension has separated them from the bond of love; it embraces even those who do not enjoy the Christian Faith, so that all mankind is under the power of Jesus Christ” (Encycl. Annum Sacrum). Nor is any distinction made between individuals, the home, or civil society, since men are no less under the power of Christ when united in society than as single individuals. He alone is the source of individual and public welfare. “‘Neither is there salvation in any other. For there is no other name under heaven given to men, whereby we must be saved” (Acts iv, 12). He alone is the Author of prosperity and true happiness both in individual citizens and in States. “The duties of the blessed city and duties of man are no different; for the city is

Page 258

    226 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST no other than a concourse of men” (Aug. ad Maced. 18, iii). If the heads of nations wish the safety of their governments and the growth and progress of their country, they must not refuse to give, together with their people, public teStimony of reverence and obedience to the empire of Christ. What We said at the beginning of Our Pontificate about the breakdown of the principle of authority and of respect for government may fittingly be said again: “They have driven Jesus Christ,” We then lamented, “out of laws and public affairs.” Authority suddenly appears to be something derived not from God but from men, and consequently its foundations totter. Forgotten the First Cause, there is no reason why one should command and another obey. From this error indeed come those widespread disturbances in society when it rests no longer upon its natural foundations (Udi Arcano). PROMISE OF HARMONY AND PEACE If men, instead, both privately and publicly, will recognize the sovereign power of Christ, the signal benefits of a just freedom, of calm order and of harmony and peace will pervade the whole human race. Just as the royal rights of Our Lord render the human authority of princes and heads of States sacred to a certain degree, so too they ennoble the duties imposed by obedience on the citizen. Impressing upon wives and servants the necessity of beholding Christ in their husbands and masters, St. Paul

Page 259

    _ oe ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 227 clearly warns them that they should not obey them as men but because they recognize them as the heirs of Christ. Otherwise it would not be fitting for men redeemed by Christ to serve other men. “You are bought with a price; be not the bond-slaves of men” (I Cor. vii, 23). If princes and legitimate rulers will be convinced that they rule not so much in their own right as through a mandate from the Divine King, it is easy to see what holy and wise use they will make of their power, and with what zeal for the common good and the dignity of their subjects they will be inflamed both in the making and the enforcing of laws. When this happens every reason for sedition is removed and order and tranquillity flourish and grow strong. When citizens see that their rulers and the heads of their States are men like themselves, or are for some reason unworthy or culpable, they will continue even then to obey their commands because they will recognize in them the image of the authority of Christ, the God-Man. As for the effect of all this upon concord and peace, manifestly the vaster this Kingdom is and the more widely it embraces mankind, so much the more will men become conscious of the bond of brotherhood that unites them. Just as this consciousness of their brotherhood banishes confliéts, so too it weakens bitternesses and turns them into love. If the Kingdom of Christ, which rightly embraces all men, should in faét embrace them, could we then despair of that peace which the King of Peace

Page 260

    228 : THE REIGN. OF CHRIST brought to earth, that King, We say, who came “to reconcile all things, who did not come to be served but to serve others” and who, though the Lord of all, made Himself an example of humility and eStablished humility and charity as His chief law? “My yoke,” He said, “is sweet and my burden light” (Matt. xi, 30). Oh, what happiness might we enjoy if individual families and States would only allow themselves to be ruled by Christ! “Then indeed,” to use the words of Our Predecessor, Leo XIII, addressed twenty-five years ago to all the Bishops of the Catholic world, “would many wounds be cured, and every right would regain its ancient force and the blessings of peace would return, and swords and weapons would fall to the ground, when all would willingly accept the Empire of Christ and obey Him and when every tongue would proclaim that ‘Our Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory of the Father.’” (Annum. Sacrum, May 25, 1899.) In order that these wished-for results may be more abundant and may last longer in human society, it is necessary for the royal dignity of Our Lord to be recognized and spread abroad as widely as possible. To this end it seems to Us that nothing else can help as much as to institute a particular feast day that will belong to Christ Our King. The annual celebration of the sacred mysteries is more effective in informing people in the faith and in bringing the inward joys of life to them than the solemn pronouncements of the teaching Church.

Page 261

    ke ee Aree an ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 229 Documents are often read only by a few learned men; feasts move and teach all the faithful. The former speak only once; the latter every year and forever. The former bring a saving touch only to the mind; the latter influence not only the mind but the heart and man’s whole nature. Being composed of body and soul, man needs to be aroused by external solemnities so that, through the variety and beauty of the sacred liturgy, he may receive the Divine teachings in his soul and, then changing them into substance and blood, use them to advance in the spiritual life. FEASTS INTRODUCED TO MEET SPECIAL NEEDS From history, it is learned that the feasts of the Church during the passing of the centuries were introduced one after the other, according as the need of welfare of Christian peoples seemed to require it. As, for example, when it was necessary that people should be strengthened before a common danger or defended from the poisonous errors of heretics or strongly encouraged to celebrate with greater piety some mystery of Faith or a blessing of divine grace. Thus,