 to the newly liberated Church, Pope Leo XIII fearlessly stated in his great En155

Page 186

    156 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST cyclical ““On the Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart,” the flaming emblem of this Divine Heart, surmounted with the cross and wreathed with the crown of thorns, must mean for us in our own day of battle and of spiritual conquest. Before that radiant sign of salvation the ancient idolatry was at last forced back, slowly but surely, into the darkness out of which it had come. With broken ranks . and trailing banners it sank back before a supernatural power with which it could not cope. So we may confidently trust that the new paganism which again has overspread the earth will in these latter days at length © be forced to recede before the invincible advance of the Standard divinely given into our hands—the golden oriflamme which bears the symbol of the Sacred Heart, the emblem of the Love of Christ, slighted and ignored by men. But let us hear the very words of the illustrious Pontiff who first pressed into our hands that Standard and bade us march on with it to victory over all our spiritual foes. “At an epoch,” wrote the Holy Father, “when the Church, still close to its beginnings, was bowed down beneath the yoke of the Czsars, a youthful Emperor saw in the heavens the sign of a cross, which announced to him and prepared a glorious victory soon to follow. This day behold there appears before our eyes another emblem, prophetic of blessings and all Divine, the most Sacred

Page 187

    THE HEART OF THE KING 157 Heart of Jesus, surmounted by the cross, and burning with a splendor of glory in the midst of flame. In this we mutt place all our hope, of this we must ask and expect the salvation of mankind.” (May 25, 1899.) We understand, therefore, the importance attached in the mind of the Sovereign Pontiff to this consecration, _an event such as had never before taken place. It implied no less than the dedication of all classes, nations and individuals, irrespective of creeds, to the Sacred Heart. The result of this supreme aét of the Pontificate of Pope Leo XIII the world has already experienced, and nowhere perhaps more evidently than in the decrees on “Frequent and Daily Communion,” and on the “Early Communion of Children.”’ Devotion to the Sacred Heart is ever most intimately associated with the frequent and fervent reception of the Holy Eucharist and with an ‘ ardent attraction to the Sacred Presence in the Tabernacle. So, too, the very battle cry with which the Church, under Pope Pius X advanced to the spiritual conquest of the world—“To renew all things in Christ!’”—was inspired by the zeal that flamed in the Heart of the Saviour. The casting forth of Modernism from the bosom of the Church, where viper-like it had nestled, meaning to infliGt its deadly Sting, was another manifestation of the love and power of the Sacred Heart under whose aegis all mankind had now been placed.

Page 188

    158 THE REIGN OF CHRIST But we must not forget here, as I need but say in passing, that it was through Mary that the reign of Christ and of His Sacred Heart was to be ushered into the world. As His first coming had been through her, so every grace continues to flow to us through Mary’s hands. It was really with the declaration of the Dogma of the Immaculate Conception that the great advance began, and the consecration of the entire human race to the Sacred Heart was itself a magnificent culmination of this Providential movement. While the legions and principalities of darkness are continuing their wonted work of inciting to greed, sensuality and infidelity among rich and poor alike; while Protestantism is daily drifting farther from the first essential of Christianity, belief in the Divinity of Christ as the Incarnate Son of God; while the seéts amid their countless bewildering contradictions and divergencies are vainly seeking for unity away from the only center of unity which Christ Himself has eStablished, we behold the Catholic Church shine forth in all her glory, the city built upon the mountain to which the eyes of all the world are turned in wonder and expectation. Truly a sublime thought was the Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart—a Divine thought: for it had its origin not in the mind of man but in the Heart of Christ Itself. The direct occasion, in fat, which led to this Consecration was the revelations regarding it, claimed to have been received by a saintly Religious,

Page 189

    THE HEART OF THE KING 159 hidden away from the world and unknown to it, like St. Margaret Mary. Yet it was the desire of the Holy Father that an act of such. importance should rest upon the teachings of theology and tradition, and not upon the private message which had first inspired it. He, therefore, confided the inquiry into this question to the Jesuit Cardinal Mazella. The answer he received was clear and convincing. It was drawn from the pages of Saint Thomas. In speaking of Christ’s Kingdom, the Angelic Doctor distinguishes between two classes of men: those who submit to the sovereignty of Christ out of obedience, guantum ad executionem potestatis; and those who belong to His dominion out of its inevitableness, quantum ad potestatem. The latter, though not of His Fold, though perhaps equally ignorant of Him and of His Church, are, nevertheless, His subjects. All must obey His will and enter the Catholic Fold when once they recognize it as truly the one and only Church of Christ, His Kingdom upon earth. All human beings, irrespective of what may be their creed, can be offered up to the Sacred Heart, dedicated and consecrated to It. By this act a new bond has been formed, binding them more closely to the one Divine center of all-saving grace and mercy.

Page 190

Page 191

    THE HEART OF THE KING 3. CONSECRATION OF WORLD TO SACRED HEART The circumstances that impelled Pope Leo XIII to ordain for the Universal Church the great Act of the Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart, deserve to be recalled to mind once more, particularly at the present moment when we are already reaping its plentiful benefits. The initiative for this step was given to the Supreme Pontiff by a Good Shepherd nun, Sister Mary of the Divine Heart, in a small convent, in a remote little town of Portugal. In recording her “revelations,” which were the undoubted occasion of bringing about this remarkable event, I must first, however, protest, in accordance with the decree of Pope Urban VIII, that it is not my purpose to anticipate in any way the judgment of the Church regarding their authenticity, nor in any other way to forestall the Church’s pronouncements concerning the person in question. Yet the unusual significance of what, under these restrictions, I shall call her revelations, lies in the fact that the message based on them was evidently received by Pope Leo XIII as the 161

Page 192

    162 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST expression to him of the Divine Will. Thus, in all truth, Sister Mary of the Divine Heart became God’s instrument for the accomplishment of the Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart. By a wonderful dispensation of Providence her entire life was summed up in this single work. All that had preceded it was for her a long and faithful preparation for this one purpose, still unknown to her. With its attainment came likewise the end of her earthly career. On June 9, 1899, the Feast of the Sacred Heart, and the opening of the solemn triduum preceding the consecration of mankind to that Divine Heart, when her own part in the design of God had been completely accomplished, our Lord called her to Himself. Her sufferings, her sacrifices, her fidelity had been, as it would seem, the conditions on which the Divine Will had made dependent the fulfilment of Its designs. Thus purified in the fires of charity, she was made fit to become the intermediary between Christ and His Vicar upon earth. Her first letter, written to Rome in obedience to the Divine command, was left entirely unnoticed; she had done her duty and was satisfied. Her second letter, written a year later, in answer to a renewed revelation and at the cost of intense sufferings, deeply moved the Sovereign Pontiff, but again no reply was granted. Finally, as the will of the Sacred Heart was once more made manifest to her, the third message was prepared,

Page 193

    THE HEART OF THE KING 163 and signed by her with trembling hand. This time, however, even before her letter had left the little town of Oporto, in Portugal, where from her bed of suffering she was directing a convent of Good Shepherd nuns, Sister Mary of the Divine Heart knew that her mission was fulfilled and that the great object of her life was now to be accomplished. In spite of the silence which had followed her previous letters she henceforth had no doubt that her prayers were answered and the Consecration of Mankind to the Sacred Heart would be no longer delayed. As an incentive to our own zeal in promoting with all our strength and fervor the conversion of the world and the coming of God’s Kingdom upon earth, it may be well to quote here a passage from this last letter which so deeply impressed the Sovereign Pontiff to whom it was directed. It will also best explain both the nature and purpose of that Consecration which has created for us a new bond of brotherhood with all mankind, the brotherhood in the Sacred Heart. Her own words follow: “On the eve of the Immaculate Conception, Our Lord made me understand that by this new development of the devotion to His Divine Heart He will illuminate the entire world with fresh light. The words of the third Mass of Christmas Day penetrated my heart: ‘For this day a great light hath descended upon earth.’ “T seemed (interiorly) to behold rays streaming down

Page 194

    164 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST from this light, this adorable Sun, the Heart of Jesus. Its rays were shed upon the earth, in a faint manner at first, then more and more brightly, until the whole world was illuminated. And He said: ‘People and all nations shall be enlightened with the brightness of this light, and warmed by the intense heat of its rays.’ “T understood the ardent desire He had that His Adorable Heart should be glorified ever more and more, and better known; and that its gifts and blessings should be spread over all the world. He has chosen your Holiness, and prolonged your days in order that you may now give Him this honor and may console His outraged Heart, the source of all grace, the abode of peace and happiness. I feel unworthy to communicate all this to your Holiness; but our Lord, after impressing me ever more profoundly with a sense of my own misery, and making me renew the sacrifice of myself as victim and spouse of His Heart, with the willing acceptance by me of all kinds of sufferings, humiliation and contempt, gave me Striét order to write to your Holiness on this subject. “Tt may seem Strange that our Lord should ask for the consecration of the whole world, and not be satisfied with the consecration of the Catholic Church. But His desire to reign, to be loved and glorified, and to inflame all hearts with His love and mercy, is so intense that He wills that your Holiness should offer Him the hearts of all those without the Fold, who by holy Baptism belong to Him, in order to facilitate their return to the true

Page 195

    THE HEART OF THE KING 165 Church; and that you should hasten the spiritual birth of those others still unbaptized, who have not as yet been made partakers of the supernatural life, but for whom no less He sacrificed His life and shed His Blood, who therefore are likewise called by Him to be one day children of Holy Church.” The letter reached the Vatican, January 15, 1899, and the Holy Father, after due inquiry, decided that the solemn consecration should take place in the following year. But on March 1, the eve of his ninetieth birthday, a serious illness necessitated an operation, which was performed with marvelous success. In this crisis Our Lord consoled His faithful spouse with the assurance that the ancient Pontifi’s life should be preserved, “in order that the desires of His heart should be accomplished.” Rome now delayed no longer, and with unwonted rapidity the decree was published which ordered a solemn triduum, preparatory to the Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart, to be begun on June g, 1899, in all the churches throughout the entire world. “Trust in Me,” Our Lord had promised St. Margaret Mary, “My Heart shall reign, My Heart shall triumph.” We are living in the dawn of that day of victory, and our ensign is the banner of the Sacred Heart. In this sign conquer!

Page 196

Page 197

Page 198

Page 199

    CHRIST REIGNING FROM THE CROSS A Religious of the Sacred Heart

Page 200

Page 201

    . . ee my : bs ete. — -! ‘ Vex! THE ROYAL SERVICE 1. THE FEAST OF CHRIST THE KING Ts first Act of Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart took place, as we have seen, in the year 1899. More than two hundred years had then passed since the appearance of Christ to St. Margaret Mary and His message to her that His Sacred Heart must reign. Another quarter of a century now elapsed, and on December 11, 1925, Pope Pius XI issued his important Encyclical on the Establishment of the Feast of Our Lord Jesus Christ as King, to be celebrated every year on the last Sunday of the month of Oétober. At the same time he commanded also “that on this same day, each year, be renewed the Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, which our Predecessor, Pius X of holy memory, ordered to be repeated each year.” And which Leo XIII had first prescribed to be made over all the world. A few slight changes, entirely non-essential, were made in the original Act to meet our present needs more perfeétly. Thus revised it is to continue permanently and will be recited each year, in all the churches, on the Feast 169

Page 202

    170 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST of Christ the King. The Aét itself will be found in the following section. While, therefore, the Encyclical of Pope Pius XI eStablishes firmly the regal authority of Christ over all mankind, and the Feast of Christ the King honors with due liturgical solemnity His royal dignity, the Consecration itself of the entire human race is in reality made to the Sacred Heart of Christ the King, as Leo XIII and Pius X had previously ordained. Interpreting this action of the Holy See we find a complete harmony in the various ordinations. The purpose of the successive Sovereign Pontiffs has been ever the same; to consecrate all mankind to the Entire Person of Our Lord Jesus Christ, but under the special aspect of that Love wherewith His Heart is consumed for us. Thus it is to Christ, with the Sacred Heart flaming in His breast and the crown of Royalty set upon His brow, that we cry out: “Be Thou King!” “Be Thou King, not only of the Faithful who have never forsaken Thee, but also of the prodigal children who have abandoned Thee, and grant that they may quickly return to their Father’s house. Be Thou King of those who are deceived by erroneous opinion, or whom discord holds aloof, and call them back to the harbor of truth and unity of faith, so that soon there may be but one Flock and one Shepherd.” And next we continue, with the Church, to pray also for the Idolater and the Ismaelite; while for the Jews

Page 203

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 171 we ask that the Blood of the Divine Saviour, invoked of old upon their head, may now descend on them as “a laver of redemption and of life.” Then comes the great climax: “Grant, O Lord, to Thy Church, assurance of freedom and immunity from harm; give peace and order to all nations, and make the earth resound from pole to pole with one cry: Praise to the Divine Heart that wrought our salvation, to it be glory and honor forever. Amen.” The supreme purpose, therefore, of the Church in eStablishing the Feast of Our Lord Jesus Christ as King was the return of the nations to the sovereign love and sway of their Divine Saviour. They were to be taught that not only had they been purchased by Christ at the price of His Precious Blood, but that of His very nature He cannot but rule over them, since from the very moment of His conception He is King of kings and Lord of lords. On the truth that “the Incarnate Word is consubstantial with the Father,”’ wrote Pius Xi in his great Encyclical, “rests, as on its foundation, the Empire of the same Christ over all peoples.” He is King of the individual soul, King of the family circle, King of society in its every phase whether civil, social, industrial, commercial or educational. He is King of nations, singly and in their relations with one another. In a word, He is King of all the earth, King of all mankind, King of Protestant, Jew and Infidel no less than of

Page 204

    172 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST the hundreds of millions of faithful Catholics acclaiming His Kingship throughout the world. These, then, are the faéts which the Feast of Christ the King was to bring home to individuals and to society, to masses and classes, to citizen and ruler. How could the ceremonials of the Church be better employed, her pulpit, press and school be made to serve a higher purpose, than in convincing the world of these truths and in procuring for Christ the honor and service due to Him as Universal King of mankind? Who, indeed, is not stirred with a new pulsing and throbbing of loyalty in his heart at the approach of the Feast of Our Lord Jesus Christ as King? There is something like martial music in the very words that make us long to fall in rank for the spiritual conquest of the world for Him. Well may we wish that the time might come when wars would be forgotten as “old, unhappy, far-off things,” but all the more let our enthusiasm grow for this Divine campaign whose motive is love instead of hate, whose victories forge no chains but free from slavery. A poor Catholic, surely, a poor Christian is he who cannot be aroused by a cause like this! The Standards of the King advance. We see their gold and purple folds unrolled upon the air. Who would not drop in line, who would not fall in Step to win the world for Him? All Divine in her institution, the Church nevertheless uses every human means adapted to convey her message.

Page 205

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 173 The external glory of worship, the beauty of rite and ceremony, the brightness of lighted altars and gleaming vestments, the profusion of flowers and the fair young faces of her acolytes, the inspiration of music and song— all these are means intended to lend beauty, dignity and impressiveness to her feasts. But where can they be better employed than to express in gladness and triumphant jubilation the one great royal truth of Christ’s Kingship over all mankind? To attach still greater consequence to this truth, made visible and tangible, as it were, in the Feast of Our Lord Jesus Christ as King, the Church has made of it in reality the crowning solemnity of the entire ecclesiastical year. In the words of Pope Pius XI, she has set it for the last Sunday of October in order that so, “the mysteries of the life of Jesus Christ, commemorated during the year, will be completed and fulfilled by the sacred solemnity of Christ the King.” The Feast of All Saints, too, which direétly follows it, now takes on a new significance. It becomes supplementary to the Feast of Christ the King, bringing in glorious review before us the ranks of the Blessed in Heaven as a vast pageant lending magnificence to the Divine royalty of the God-Man. It thus can be viewed, with the new vision given us, as in reality an appanage to the Feast of Christ the King, displaying to us the splendors of His celestial Empire, where He is enthroned as King of Angels and of Saints.

Page 206

    174 THE REIGN OF CHRIST This, too, is no fanciful interpretation, but the express mind of the Church, for Pope Pius XI definitely informs us that the reason for solemnizing the Feast of Christ the King directly before that of All Saints is in order that so, “before celebrating the glory of all the saints, the glory of Him who triumphs in all the saints and elect will be preached and emphasized.” Thus the Feast of All Saints can now be said to reflect back the splendors of the Feast of Christ the King. The desire of the Church is that everything possible should be done to prepare the minds and hearts of the Faithful for the annual celebration of this Feast in a worthy and fruitful manner. Pope Pius XI, therefore, addressing the entire ecclesiastical Hierarchy of the world, laid down these regulations: “Let this, therefore, be your task to see that on stated days before the annual celebration sermons be preached to the people in every parish, informing and ingtruéting them accurately on the nature, manner, and importance of the subject, so that they may arrange and conform their lives in such a manner as to be worthy of giving faithful and zealous tribute to the Empire of the Divine King.”

Page 207

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 2. THE SOCIAL REIGN OF CHRIST THE KING The Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart, in whose renewal the Celebration of the Feast of Christ the King annually culminates, has a very special significance for our own day in its bearing on the important social question. When Our Divine Lord made known to St. Margaret Mary the devotion to the Sacred Heart as He desired it to be practised in these latter days, He gave as His reason the waning love of mankind, the coldness that had seized on the hearts of men. This it was which called forth the last supreme effort to bring about a renewal of love in the world. Seeing the affection of the Divine Heart for us, the fires of His love bursting forth from it as from a furnace and completely encompassing it; the crown of thorns about it and the cross surmounting it, in the midst of flames: recalling that eagerness for our salvation and sanctification which caused Him to sacrifice and immolate Himself for us, amidst all the ignominies and torments of Calvary—who can fail to be moved to give Him in return love for love? 175

Page 208

    176 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST Christ Our Love is crucified. It was love for us which made Him freely choose His life of labor and of suffering, His Passion and His Death. And all that love is symbolized in the flaming Heart we behold in the open breast of the Divine Master. That revelation is the last effort of His love to win our hearts for Him, to turn them towards Heaven and to God. But loving Christ we must also love our fellow man, for whatever we do to the least of our brethren, He has told us, we do unto Him, be it evil or good, and our reward or punishment will be apportioned accordingly by the Divine King. Now there precisely is the basic solution of the entire social problem. If the charity of Christ urges us, if it is the norm of our dealings with our fellow men in our social, economic, industrial, commercial and civic relations, then the social problem has been solved. All other difficulties, although they will still call for continued Study and consideration, are but minor and inconsiderable in comparison. The great obstacle in the way of a sincere codperation of all classes for the common good would then have been set aside, once for all. What else is the fundamental cause of the entire social problem which agitates the world, if not the want of love? Men either do not know Christ, or knowing Him they do not love Him as they ought. In either case the hearts of mankind are left cold and irresponsive. Men do

Page 209

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 177 not heed the laws of justice because they have already neglected the laws of charity. Love is the remedy by which the world mutt be saved. Mere human love alone does not suffice. The Love of Christ is needed, as we behold it flaming in that Sacred Heart, to re-awaken the dead bones of a godless and selfish civilization, and breathe into them the new life of grace. Mere human love will seek in vain to fill the chasms cleft open by divergent interests, economic greed and social hatred, as we behold them separating class from class in so many countries of the world today. Divine love alone can again unite class with class, consume pride and ambition, overcome selfishness and hate, and bring about a true codperation for the common good. With special confidence therefore let the world turn today in all its social difficulties to that love, both human and Divine, of the God-Man Christ, the Saviour—a love infinite in its power and most compassionate in its tenderness. But it is particularly of the human love of the Word made flesh for us that the Sacred Heart is the symbol. To this, therefore, we may confidently look for the renovation of modern society. No merely personal opinion is here expressed, but the supreme conviction of the great social Pontiff Pope Leo XIII himself. The intimate relation existing between the social problems of our day and devotion to the Sacred

Page 210

    tay 178 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST Heart was more than once clearly declared by him. The very reason for his dedication of the world to this Divine Heart, he said, was “to provide a remedy for the evils. of the day.” For the rest it will suffice to quote here the words spoken by him at a still earlier period, in 1893, to the delegates of the Apostleship of Prayer, as they are recorded by the Rev. John B. Nolin, S.J., in his “Missions and Retreats of the Sacred Heart”: “Jesus Christ had deigned to reveal to His servant Margaret Alacoque that devotion to the Sacred Heart was preordained by God to cure selfishness—the capital wound of modern society—that selfishness which is the idolatry of self or the worship of one’s own sensuality and pride; that egotism which substitutes self for God and places it above humanity, thus referring everything to self and usurping all the rights of God and the Church, of individuals and society; that selfishness which breaks all the bonds of social and Christian life by combatting at once religion and morality, authority and faith, property and family. “Now is there any means better adapted to combat it than the powerful flames of love, which, starting from the most loving Heart of Jesus, have enkindled the whole world with the happy flame of charity by breathing the spirit of a new moral and civic life into the corpse of pagan society. I am come to cast fire upon the earth. But as the preservation of things can be produced only by their general principle, and the general principle of

Page 211

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 179 Christian society is the love of the Divine Heart, it must also be its means of restoration.” Here we have in brief the entire social purpose of the devotion to the Sacred Heart. No less is proposed to us than the renewal of all things in Christ, which was to be the keynote of the Pontificate of the saintly Pope Pius X. But the liturgy itself of the Feast of Christ the King cannot fail to have its own powerful social influence as it continues to bring before the world, direétly and indirectly, the rightful claims of Christ over every form of society, and His supreme authority over all economic contracts and industrial or commercial relations. This truth was notably voiced, in anticipation, by a writer in the British Guardian, at the time when the nature of the new Feast was first made public. He then wrote: “Through the most powerful means which Rome has to reach the masses of its faithful people—the splendid living imagery of words, action and song which we call her liturgy—she is going to proclaim anew and more clearly than ever that Christ is not only King of individuals, but also King of societies, that, therefore, in the dealings of class with class or nations with nations, just as in the dealings of individuals with individuals, the only Standard of right and wrong are His precepts and His counsels; that no inferior Christian morality, charity and justice must characterize contracts between masters and workmen, state and