 presence of the Jews who had accused Him of violating the Sabbath by curing the paralytic, that the Father had given Him judicial power: “For neither doth the Father judge any man, but hath given all judgment to the Son.” (John v, 22.) By this we must understand that He had the right of rewarding and punishing men even during their lives, since this inheres in the power of judging. Executive power must equally be attributed to Chris, since it is necessary for all to obey His commands, and for none to escape them without meeting the punishments He eStablished.”’ Christ, therefore, is King—King in all truth and reality. He is King of the individual; King of the family circle; King of society in its every phase: religious, civil, social, industrial, commercial and educational. He is King no less of the nations themselves, whether singly or in their relations with one another. He is King, in fine, of every group of peoples and every league of nations. In a word, Christ is King of all the earth, King of all mankind, King of Catholic, Protestant, Jew and Infidel. Such is the full truth so definitely proclaimed to all the world by the Holy See.

Page 37

    THE ETERNAL KING 3. TRUE CONCEPT OF CHRIST’S KINGDOM The New Testament abounds with allusions to Christ’s visible Kingdom. The Prophets had foretold it, but now John the Baptist was sent to prepare the way for it: ““Do penance: for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.” (Matt. ili, 2.) Then came Christ Himself, and at the very beginning of His public ministry we are told concerning Him: “And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom.” (Matt. iv, 23.) The Apostles correctly understood, although as yet very imperfectly, that there was question of a visible Kingdom which Christ was to establish. In this they foresaw that they would hold positions of dignity. Hence we have the ambition of the two sons of Zebedee finding expression through their mother’s intercession for them with Jesus: “Say that these my two sons may sit, the one on Thy right hand, and the other on Thy left, in Thy Kingdom.” (Matt. xx, 21.) The views of the other ten Apostles did not differ from those of John and James, as is quite evident from what the Scripture immediately adds: “And the ten hearing it, 19

Page 38

    20 > THE REIGN OF CHRIST were moved with indignation against the two brethren.” (Ibid. 24.) Yet this anticipation of a visible Kingdom, which Christ was to establish, however mistaken in its particulars, was essentially correct and Christ never disabused them of it. On the contrary all His words confirmed it. But the visible Kingdom He was to found would be far different from anything they could now comprehend. When the fulness of the Holy Ghost should have come down on them—then they would understand. The gradual organization of that Kingdom eStablished by Christ can be followed in the Acts of the Apostles, from the great Day of Pentecost on to its complete development in the lifetime of the Apostles, with Bishops ordained and set over its various communities or “churches.” The Divine King Himself was now indeed no longer visible in the midst of His own, but He had definitely appointed His Vicar, who should be the visible head of His Kingdom on earth, and who through his successors would continue to govern that Kingdom to the end of time under its invisible Ruler, Christ the King. “Thou art Peter,” are the memorable words of the Saviour which no attempts of criticism can ever obliterate or explain away, “and upon this rock I will build My Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give to thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven.” (Matt. xvi, 18, 19.) 4 ¥ j

Page 39

    THE ETERNAL KING 21 The fulness of His royal power, immeasurably surpassing all other authority ever held by man, Christ expressed when He said: “‘All power is given Me in Heaven and on earth,” to which He immediately added His last commission: “Going, therefore, teach ye all nations; baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the world.” (Matt. xxviii, 18-20.) The visible ministry of teaching was to precede the visible administration of the Sacrament of Baptism, by which entrance was granted into His visible Kingdom. The great future conquests of that Kingdom were to be in the mission fields, already pointed out to the Apostles, where service was hard, sacrifices were abundant, and death for Christ the King was the ultimate reward here below. Besides the large cities of Jerusalem and Alexandria, there were then also a number of metropolitan ports scattered over the Roman Empire. These centers, in which numerous proselytes were collected, became the first churches of the Gospel of the Kingdom, and Starting points for its propagation. Soon the new spiritual Empire of Christ, now fully organized and developed, had spread, far and wide. Many were converted out of the various tribes and races, and gladly made their submission to the Divine King.

Page 40

    22 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST The ApoStles, with the Bishops ordained by them, were the rulers of that spiritual Kingdom. Its first expansion naturally was within the bounds of the pagan Empire of Rome, whose dominion extended over all the civilized world. Along the military roads built for the march of the triumphant Roman armies and over the bridges that had resounded to the tread of the legions on their way to foreign conquests, the messengers of Christ now sped to preach the Gospel of the Kingdom. Over hills and mountains, through forests and plains, the roads led on to the ends of a world subject to the imperial sway of the Caesars and tributary to the wealth of Rome. Yet in the Providence of God the pride and power of the pagan conqueror had thus only prepared the way for the new spiritual conquests of the world for Christ the King. Already the Prophecy of Ezechiel was going into fulfilment: “Thus saith the Lord God: I Myself will take the marrow of the high cedar, and will set it: I will crop off a tender twig from the top of the branches thereof, and I will plant it on a mountain high and eminent. “On the high mountain of Israel will I plant it, and it shall shoot forth into branches, and shall bear fruit, and it shall become a great cedar: and all the birds shall dwell under it, and every fowl shall make its nest under the shadow of the branches thereof.” (Ezech. xvii, 22, 23.) SSE LS Sk Se OS OM ey ae lg ae ate i oc

Page 41

    THE ETERNAL KING 23 From the very top branches, therefore, of “the marrow of the high cedar,” which represents the royal Stock of David, a tender twig was to be cropped, that is Christ the King, who should come from the royal house of David. The mountain, “high and eminent,” on which that twig should be planted is the Kingdom over which Christ would rule, His Holy Church, catholic, that is universal. ‘““The mountain of the house of the Lord,” Isaias calls it, which “shalll be prepared on the top of mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it.” (Is. ii, 2.) Christ Himself had no less clearly foretold that universality of His Kingdom, the Church. “The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed,” He said in His familiar parable, “which a man took and sowed in his field. Which is the least indeed of all seeds; but when it is grown up, it is greater than all herbs, and becomes a tree, so that the birds of the air come, and dwell in the branches thereof.” (Matt. xiii, 31,32.) The Kingdom of Christ, then, is perfectly visible and unmistakable, as all these predictions of it make most plain. It is visible in its rulers whom Christ appointed to govern it, the Apostles and their successors. It is visible in its Key-bearer, Peter, set over His entire flock by Christ and continuing his ministry in the unbroken line of Sovereign Pontiffs. It is visible in its preaching of the Gospel, its Sacraments, and all the material means that it must use in its mission for the salvation and sanc 

Page 42

    24 a TEE REIGN OF CHRIST tification of mankind. It is visible, finally, in the characteristic notes that mark it off from every other society on earth: its unity, holiness, universality and apostolicity. All these we see verified in the Catholic Church alone, the one and only Kingdom of Christ on earth. That Kingdom, as is evident, can admit of no sects or schisms. It is essentially one and undivided. For as Christ the King so definitely declares, a kingdom divided against itself shall fall. There is but one Church that knows of no divisions; from which, by revolt or schism, others have separated themselves, but which itself goes back, one and undivided, to the time when Christ established it on Peter. Within that Church, Christ’s Kingdom, there continues to the end of time the one Sacrifice of the New Law, foreshadowed by Melchisedech and instituted by Christ: “Do this for a commemoration of Me.” (Luke xxii, 19.) It is the clean oblation which the Prophet so vividly predicted should be offered up by the Gentiles over all the earth: “For from the rising of the sun even to the going down, My name is great among the Gentiles, and in every place there is sacrifice, and there is offered to My name a clean oblation: for My name is great among the Gentiles.” (Mal. 1, 11.) The vivifying principle within that Kingdom is the Holy Ghost, who is the Soul of the Church. He enlightens, inspires and sanctifies the individual soul, but His indwelling in that Kingdom is necessary in a particu 

Page 43

    THE ETERNAL KING 25 lar way that He may guide its rulers in all truth. So - more and more fully we realize the wonderful beauty and grandeur of that Divine Institution which is Christ’s Kingdom on earth. Yet holiness, although one of the distinétive marks of this Kingdom, does not imply the sanétity of each of its subjects. Christ Himself makes this clear: “Again the Kingdom of Heaven is like to a net cast into the sea and gathering together all kind of fish.” The fishermen, when it is filled, draw towards the shore, and there choose out the good, but cast forth the bad. “So shall it be at the end of the world,”’ Our Lord continues. “The angels shall go out, and shall separate the wicked from among the just.” (Matt. xiii, 47-49.) But the Kingdom of Christ, His Holy Church, is not destined then to come to an end. It is eternal. It shall continue in Heaven, purged of every imperfection that was connected with it here below. There, in that Kingdom Triumphant, we are called to share with Christ the eternal reign of His glory.

Page 44

Page 45

    THE ETERNAL KING 4. WORLD-CONQUEST AND SELF-CONQUEST To bring about the practical acknowledgment of the royalty of Christ and the propagation of His Kingdom throughout the world must obviously be our great and ultimate purpose. But to do this properly and according to the desires of the Divine Heart, we must first look to ourselves. What is of the utmost moment to us personally is our own perfect loyalty to Christ the King. Among the great souls who mightily promoted the Kingdom of Christ on earth St. Ignatius is particularly distinguished for an eager and chivalrous devotion to Christ the King. That title he strikingly applied to the Divine Saviour in those remarkable meditations on the Kingdom of Christ and the Two Standards. But it is characteristic of the far-sightedness and practical wisdom of this apostolic Saint, guided as he was by the Holy Spirit, that after his introductory proclamation regarding the Kingdom of Christ, and his soulStirring summons to a crusade far more vast than even St. Bernard preached, he suddenly turns to the almost exclusive consideration of our own personal service of Christ the King. 27

Page 46

    28 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST Just when we are set on fire with the thought of world-conquest for Christ, the Saint bids us think of self-conquest—not that he would have us ignore the former, but that he would render us fit for such a task by first overcoming ourselves. The desire of the Saint in urging us to put on the livery of Christ the King is to raise our souls to so sublime a height of fervor and enthusiasm that out of pure love for our Divine Leader we may wish to bear with joy even poverty, humiliation and contempt in company with Him, so to become more like to Him who bore all these for love of us. Thus he would have us counted among the chosen few, most close to the Person of their Leader, who share with Him in His hardships and sufferings as they are hereafter to share with Him in His glory. That same chivalrous ideal of St. Ignatius all the Saints doubtless understood, but each in his own way. The Holy Father, in his appeal to the Faithful, equally demands of them in the first place a complete personal loyalty on their part towards Christ the King. But for this he too finds it necessary to call on them to deny themselves, take up the cross, and follow in the footsteps of their Divine Leader. With such a surrender of ourselves accomplished we shall not reét untill we too can perform our part in the conquest of the world for Christ the King, be it by example, by alms, by prayer and sacrifice, or perhaps by ——

Page 47

    THE ETERNAL KING 29 the entire dedication of ourselves and all we have to His Divine service. But though self-conquest must logically precede world-conquest, it is obviously not intended that we should negleét our neighbor until we have entirely perfected ourselves. The Holy See assures us that even the work of self-perfection will be greatly facilitated by generously endeavoring to live a life of apostolic zeal. Both aims are to be seriously kept in view. While laboring for others we are to take the time and care to render ourselves, by God’s grace, constantly more subject to Christ, devoting to His service all our faculties of body and soul. Once we are inflamed with this love and zeal for Christ the King, our very failures will only be the preparation for future successes. St. Teresa of Avila, as a mere child, set out from home with the purpose of seeking martyrdom at the hands of the Moors, but was promptly intercepted and returned to her home. St. Francis of Assisi, long before her time, went into the very presence of the Soldan to preach to him, but with no better success. St. Ignatius, fired by the same spirit, made his first goal the spiritual conquest of the Holy Land, then in the power of the Turks. He too was doomed to as complete a failure as St. Francis and the little child Teresa who ran through the Streets of Avila, her heart aflame with the love of God.

Page 48

    30 is THE REIGN OF CHRIST For all these three Saints the land of the Moor represented the Infidel World as opposed to the Kingdom of Christ. All failed in their attempts. But the point was that they had all learned first to conquer themselves, and nothing thereafter could discourage them. So where they succumbed in one venture they succeeded in a thousand others, for the glory of their Lord and King and the spreading of His Kingdom over the face of the earth. From century to century their work continues, and Still from land to land their great campaign extends, winning souls for Christ the King. First then let us try entirely to subdue for Christ that one little province which is “ourselves,” smaller though it is by far than the tiniest speck of earth whose dwellers ever hoisted their colors to the skies. We are, indeed, each a province, sovereign as against all other men in our natural rights, but subject, one and all, to Christ the universal King—a part, however tiny, of His world dominion. Yet it is not to size and importance, but to loyalty and love, that Christ looks. As God He can create for Himself millions of worlds, but what He wishes from us first and foremost is the free, joyful and loving submission to His royalty of that one little province, just Ourselves. Small as it is it has its own distin& divisions—mind, will, soul, and body—each of which must be gladly and voluntarily placed under His dominion. Minutely the

Page 49

    THE ETERNAL KING 31 Holy Father has set all this forth in one pregnant passage: “If to Christ the Lord is given alll power in heaven and on earth,” he says, “if mortal men, bought by His most Precious Blood, are subject to His sway by a certain new title, if finally this power embraces all human nature, it is clear that nothing in us is exempt from such an empire. “He must therefore reign in the mind of man, and man with perfect submission should assent firmly and consistently to revealed truth and all the doétrines of Christ. He must reign in the will which should obey the Divine laws and precepts. He must reign in the soul, which denying its natural appetites; should love God above all things and adhere to Him alone. He must reign in the body and its members, which as instruments, or to use the words of St. Paul, as ‘arms of justice unto God,’ should serve for the interior holiness of souls.” If thus we belong to Christ entirely we shall seek only the promotion of His interests and the accomplishments of His desires, until with the Apostles we too shall be able to exclaim: “I live, now not I, but Christ liveth in me.” (Gal. ii. 20.)

Page 50

Page 51

Page 52

Page 53

    CHRIST THE KING ENTHRONED AMONG HIS OWN Barabino

Page 54

Page 55

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 1. CHRIST’S SOVEREIGNTY IMPUGNED HEN Pope Pius XI, in his Encyclical on Our . Lord Jesus Christ as King, wished to specify the supreme malady of our day, which everywhere throughout the world is infecting human society, he characterized it by the one word—‘“Laicism.” The word thus used by him sounded unfamiliar to many ears in other than European countries, nor has it _ grown more familiar since then. In Europe, doubtless, the expression was common enough, and for that reason it was employed by the Holy Father, who left no doubt as to the exact sense in which he meant it to be underStood in his Encyclical. It implies the practical negation by men of the Kingship of Christ. Whatever name we may apply to this evil, its seriousness remains unquestionable. It is confined to no one country, but can be found everywhere. The Holy See evidently did not believe that any words could be too Strong to stigmatize its malignity and destructive nature. “The pest of our age,” Pope Pius XI wrote of it, “Taicism, as it is called, with its errors and nefarious workings.” 35

Page 56

    36 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST Surely when such terms are used by the Shepherd of God’s people we may be certain that there can be no doubt of the gravity of the evil thus brought to our notice. To realize the better the significance of these words let us go back to the middle of the fourteenth century, when another pestilence, of a different nature, suddenly Struck the Christian world. In a comparatively short period it carried off one fourth of the population of Europe. Men called it the “Black Death.” In 1348 it passed across the channel into England. The disastrous moral effects that followed in its wake have left their consequences to the present day. Yet the Black Death, which at one sweep of its ominous wing destroyed whole villages, whose brooding shadow depopulated entire cities, and whose awful ravages turned all Europe into one vast charnel house, was in reality less deadly than the fatal plague so Strongly referred to by the Holy See. Men well understood, in those fearful days, the evil that had befallen them. There was no delusion. In fear and horror they beheld the fair color of their bodies turned to black, and knew by this sure presage that death awaited them beyond all hope except from God alone. But the supreme misery of modern society is that it does not recognize its fatal malady. Its condition is best described in the words of the apocalyptic writer:

Page 57

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 37 “Because thou sayest: I am rich and made wealthy, and have need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.” (Apoc. iii, 17.) To give the briefest possible definition of Laicism I may call it the exclusion from modern society of Christ the King. What worse malady than to be without Him who alone is the Way, the Truth and the Life? But in reality there are many Stages to this fell disease. Its symptoms go back to the Reformation, and beyond even that time to the moral decadence that followed in the wake of the Black Death. It was sufficient, however, for the Holy Father to say that it had not arisen in a day, but had “already long infected the organisms of States.” In brief, beginning with a gradual ignoring of the Church, it passed on to the rejection of her divinely given authority, thence, to the practical negation of the Kingship of Christ, and so finally to the attempted obliteration of God Himself from His creation. All these Stages Pope Pius XI enumerates in his description of the origin and progress of the disease. “The empire of Christ over all nations,” he says, “was beginning to be denied.” After thus indicating the earlier symptoms of the malady, he proceeds to lay bare, stage by Stage, its successive phases as manifested in the body politic: “The Church was denied her rights which flowed from

Page 58

    38 ‘THE REIGN OF CHRIST the very jurisdiction of Christ: her rights of teaching mankind, of making laws, and of spiritually governing the people to bring them unto eternal happiness. By degrees the religion of Christ was placed on a footing with false religions and most unbecomingly lowered to their level. Next Christ’s Church was forced into subjection to civil powers and abandoned to the will of princes and magistrates. Some went Still further and desired the substitution of mere natural religion and a vague natural emotionalism for Divine religion. Governments even arose which imagined they could do without God entirely, and convert their attitude towards religion into one of impiety and negleét of God.” Such, then, is an accurate diagnosis of that “pest of our age, Laicism,” from its denial of the spiritual supremacy of the Church of Christ to the complete turning away of governments from God. The climax was reached in the actual subSstitution of impiety and blasphemy for religion. We here have in mind, for instance, the mimicking of the sacramental rites of the Church by the impious ceremonies of the godless Soviets. Nor did these evils end here, but they continuously found new expression in open religious persecution, ranging from attacks upon the natural liberties of Catholics and their right to educate their children in Christian schools, to decrees of banishment, and sentences of imprisonment and death.

Page 59

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 39 Hardly, in faét, had the Great War “‘to make the world safe for Democracy” come to an end when these tyrannies broke out flagrantly and with entire impunity beyond the immediate borders of the United States themselves. Nor did the press of the world find a voice to excoriate this suppression of all freedom and democracy, carried as it was to almost unimaginable excesses. But long before these events the very apotheosis of Laicism had been reached in the vaunt of that petty Statesman who in his imbecility boasted of having blotted out the lights of heaven. The “most bitter fruits” which this defection from Christ on the part of individuals and society brought about are enumerated in the Encyclical. They were the sowing of the seeds of hatred, the kindling of the flames of envy, the spreading of dissensions among nations, the indulgence of unrestrained passions which are often paraded under the mask of patriotism and of zeal for the public good, a boundless egoism and selfishness, disturbances of domestic peace owing to forgetfulness and disregard of marital obligations, rupture of family ties, and the ultimate ruin of a society shaken to its very foundations. In the enlightened exposition of these disorders of modern society by the Holy See we are taught to underStand how all these Dead Sea fruits of bitterness are really the product of that one evil, defection from Christ

Page 60

Page 61

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 2. PROMOTION OF CHRIST’S KINGDOM Evidently there is but one method to be used in dealing with this modern apostacy, and that is to do all that lies in our power, personally and corporatively, to bring back Christ to the modern world. We must seek by every legitimate means to restore His empire to the individual, to the home, to society, and to the nations in their relations with one another. For this reason the Feast of Our Lord Jesus Christ as King was instituted. It was to Stimulate in us a new, enthusiastic, and militant loyalty to Him. In the words of Pope Pius XI: “Certain it appears to us that an annual celebration of the Feast of Christ the King will greatly assist all nations towards a condemnation of and a reparation for those public apostacies which Laicism, with so much harm to society, has begotten. In fact the more the dear name of Our Redeemer is passed over in shameful silence, be it at international meetings or be it in parliaments, so much the more is it necessary for us to acclaim Him as King, and to announce everywhere the rights of His royal dignity and power.” 41

Page 62

    42 ; THE REIGN OF CHRIST While, therefore, the celebration of the Feast itself is of necessity an annual event only, yet our loyalty to Christ the King, our interest in His cause, and our promotion of His Kingdom in all hearts and over all the earth are duties limited to no time or place. With characteristic frankness the Holy Father laments the faét that Catholics, who are in possession of the truth and should hold its torch aloft before the eyes of the world, too often fail to enjoy that weight of authority or to hold in the public view those positions which it were proper for them to have. So it happens, he concludes, that owing perhaps to motives of personal convenience, to apathy or to fear of opposition, they display a lamentable weakness, which emboldens. the enemy to proceed against the Church with greater effrontery. To quote the words of the Holy Father: “The annual observance henceforth of the Feast of Christ the King inspires the highest hopes that mankind may auspiciously hasten to return to the most loving Saviour. It should indeed be the part of Catholics to mature and hasten this return by their efforts and their works, but too many among them seem not to have in their communities that social Standing, as the saying is, nor to enjoy that prestige of authority which it ill becomes those to lack who bear ahead the torch of truth. This disadvantage may be due to the inactivity of good men, who either avoid opposition or face it weakly,

Page 63

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 43 with the result that the enemies of the Church grow in rashness and audacity.” Clearly, therefore, as a trumpet call he sounds the summons for every Catholic to take his place beneath the banner of Christ the King. Not merely are we to give Him our personal allegiance, but we are to exert all our power to rally devotedly around Him our parishes, our students, our societies, our Catholic people everywhere. It is the new call to a mighty world-wide crusade, waged with the weapons of the spirit. It is the clarion note of a more virile, more militant, more aggressive Catholicism. The rattling of the old bones of indifference and religious lethargy is to give way to the prompt resolve, the firm Step, the high flush of action, and the brave ambition to do at least our part to win the world for Christ. Only by forgetting ourselves completely for Him can we rise to the true Stature of our greatness, for we then become one with Christ. “But when the Faithful clearly understand,” says the Holy Father, “that they must fight with courage, always under the banner of Christ Our King, they will then study with the zeal of apostles how best to lead back to God the eStranged and uninstructed millions. At the same time they will themselves acquire Strength to keep inviolate God’s holy laws.”