 Rakitin,
though I am bad, I did give away an onion.”

“An onion? Hang it all, you really are crazy.”

Rakitin wondered at their enthusiasm. He was aggrieved and annoyed,
though he might have reflected that each of them was just passing
through a spiritual crisis such as does not come often in a lifetime.
But though Rakitin was very sensitive about everything that concerned
himself, he was very obtuse as regards the feelings and sensations of
others—partly from his youth and inexperience, partly from his intense
egoism.

“You see, Alyosha,” Grushenka turned to him with a nervous laugh. “I
was boasting when I told Rakitin I had given away an onion, but it’s
not to boast I tell you about it. It’s only a story, but it’s a nice
story. I used to hear it when I was a child from Matryona, my cook, who
is still with me. It’s like this. Once upon a time there was a peasant
woman and a very wicked woman she was. And she died and did not leave a
single good deed behind. The devils caught her and plunged her into the
lake of fire. So her guardian angel stood and wondered what good deed
of hers he could remember to tell to God; ‘She once pulled up an onion
in her garden,’ said he, ‘and gave it to a beggar woman.’ And God
answered: ‘You take that onion then, hold it out to her in the lake,
and let her take hold and be pulled out. And if you can pull her out of
the lake, let her come to Paradise, but if the onion breaks, then the
woman must stay where she is.’ The angel ran to the woman and held out
the onion to her. ‘Come,’ said he, ‘catch hold and I’ll pull you out.’
And he began cautiously pulling her out. He had just pulled her right
out, when the other sinners in the lake, seeing how she was being drawn
out, began catching hold of her so as to be pulled out with her. But
she was a very wicked woman and she began kicking them. ‘I’m to be
pulled out, not you. It’s my onion, not yours.’ As soon as she said
that, the onion broke. And the woman fell into the lake and she is
burning there to this day. So the angel wept and went away. So that’s
the story, Alyosha; I know it by heart, for I am that wicked woman
myself. I boasted to Rakitin that I had given away an onion, but to you
I’ll say: ‘I’ve done nothing but give away one onion all my life,
that’s the only good deed I’ve done.’ So don’t praise me, Alyosha,
don’t think me good, I am bad, I am a wicked woman and you make me
ashamed if you praise me. Eh, I must confess everything. Listen,
Alyosha. I was so anxious to get hold of you that I promised Rakitin
twenty-five roubles if he would bring you to me. Stay, Rakitin, wait!”

She went with rapid steps to the table, opened a drawer, pulled out a
purse and took from it a twenty-five rouble note.

“What nonsense! What nonsense!” cried Rakitin, disconcerted.

“Take it. Rakitin, I owe it you, there’s no fear of your refusing it,
you asked for it yourself.” And she threw the note to him.

“Likely I should refuse it,” boomed Rakitin, obviously abashed, but
carrying off his confusion with a swagger. “That will come in very
handy; fools are made for wise men’s profit.”

“And now hold your tongue, Rakitin, what I am going to say now is not
for your ears. Sit down in that corner and keep quiet. You don’t like
us, so hold your tongue.”

“What should I like you for?” Rakitin snarled, not concealing his 
ill-humor. He put the twenty-five rouble note in his pocket and he felt
ashamed at Alyosha’s seeing it. He had reckoned on receiving his
payment later, without Alyosha’s knowing of it, and now, feeling
ashamed, he lost his temper. Till that moment he had thought it
discreet not to contradict Grushenka too flatly in spite of her
snubbing, since he had something to get out of her. But now he, too,
was angry:

“One loves people for some reason, but what have either of you done for
me?”

“You should love people without a reason, as Alyosha does.”

“How does he love you? How has he shown it, that you make such a fuss
about it?”

Grushenka was standing in the middle of the room; she spoke with heat
and there were hysterical notes in her voice.

“Hush, Rakitin, you know nothing about us! And don’t dare to speak to
me like that again. How dare you be so familiar! Sit in that corner and
be quiet, as though you were my footman! And now, Alyosha, I’ll tell
you the whole truth, that you may see what a wretch I am! I am not
talking to Rakitin, but to you. I wanted to ruin you, Alyosha, that’s
the holy truth; I quite meant to. I wanted to so much, that I bribed
Rakitin to bring you. And why did I want to do such a thing? You knew
nothing about it, Alyosha, you turned away from me; if you passed me,
you dropped your eyes. And I’ve looked at you a hundred times before
to-day; I began asking every one about you. Your face haunted my heart.
‘He despises me,’ I thought; ‘he won’t even look at me.’ And I felt it
so much at last that I wondered at myself for being so frightened of a
boy. I’ll get him in my clutches and laugh at him. I was full of spite
and anger. Would you believe it, nobody here dares talk or think of
coming to Agrafena Alexandrovna with any evil purpose. Old Kuzma is the
only man I have anything to do with here; I was bound and sold to him;
Satan brought us together, but there has been no one else. But looking
at you, I thought, I’ll get him in my clutches and laugh at him. You
see what a spiteful cur I am, and you called me your sister! And now
that man who wronged me has come; I sit here waiting for a message from
him. And do you know what that man has been to me? Five years ago, when
Kuzma brought me here, I used to shut myself up, that no one might have
sight or sound of me. I was a silly slip of a girl; I used to sit here
sobbing; I used to lie awake all night, thinking: ‘Where is he now, the
man who wronged me? He is laughing at me with another woman, most
likely. If only I could see him, if I could meet him again, I’d pay him
out, I’d pay him out!’ At night I used to lie sobbing into my pillow in
the dark, and I used to brood over it; I used to tear my heart on
purpose and gloat over my anger. ‘I’ll pay him out, I’ll pay him out!’
That’s what I used to cry out in the dark. And when I suddenly thought
that I should really do nothing to him, and that he was laughing at me
then, or perhaps had utterly forgotten me, I would fling myself on the
floor, melt into helpless tears, and lie there shaking till dawn. In
the morning I would get up more spiteful than a dog, ready to tear the
whole world to pieces. And then what do you think? I began saving
money, I became hard-hearted, grew stout—grew wiser, would you say? No,
no one in the whole world sees it, no one knows it, but when night
comes on, I sometimes lie as I did five years ago, when I was a silly
girl, clenching my teeth and crying all night, thinking, ‘I’ll pay him
out, I’ll pay him out!’ Do you hear? Well then, now you understand me.
A month ago a letter came to me—he was coming, he was a widower, he
wanted to see me. It took my breath away; then I suddenly thought: ‘If
he comes and whistles to call me, I shall creep back to him like a
beaten dog.’ I couldn’t believe myself. Am I so abject? Shall I run to
him or not? And I’ve been in such a rage with myself all this month
that I am worse than I was five years ago. Do you see now, Alyosha,
what a violent, vindictive creature I am? I have shown you the whole
truth! I played with Mitya to keep me from running to that other. Hush,
Rakitin, it’s not for you to judge me, I am not speaking to you. Before
you came in, I was lying here waiting, brooding, deciding my whole
future life, and you can never know what was in my heart. Yes, Alyosha,
tell your young lady not to be angry with me for what happened the day
before yesterday.... Nobody in the whole world knows what I am going
through now, and no one ever can know.... For perhaps I shall take a
knife with me to-day, I can’t make up my mind ...”

And at this “tragic” phrase Grushenka broke down, hid her face in her
hands, flung herself on the sofa pillows, and sobbed like a little
child.

Alyosha got up and went to Rakitin.

“Misha,” he said, “don’t be angry. She wounded you, but don’t be angry.
You heard what she said just now? You mustn’t ask too much of human
endurance, one must be merciful.”

Alyosha said this at the instinctive prompting of his heart. He felt
obliged to speak and he turned to Rakitin. If Rakitin had not been
there, he would have spoken to the air. But Rakitin looked at him
ironically and Alyosha stopped short.

“You were so primed up with your elder’s teaching last night that now
you have to let it off on me, Alexey, man of God!” said Rakitin, with a
smile of hatred.

“Don’t laugh, Rakitin, don’t smile, don’t talk of the dead—he was
better than any one in the world!” cried Alyosha, with tears in his
voice. “I didn’t speak to you as a judge but as the lowest of the
judged. What am I beside her? I came here seeking my ruin, and said to
myself, ‘What does it matter?’ in my cowardliness, but she, after five
years in torment, as soon as any one says a word from the heart to
her—it makes her forget everything, forgive everything, in her tears!
The man who has wronged her has come back, he sends for her and she
forgives him everything, and hastens joyfully to meet him and she won’t
take a knife with her. She won’t! No, I am not like that. I don’t know
whether you are, Misha, but I am not like that. It’s a lesson to me....
She is more loving than we.... Have you heard her speak before of what
she has just told us? No, you haven’t; if you had, you’d have
understood her long ago ... and the person insulted the day before
yesterday must forgive her, too! She will, when she knows ... and she
shall know.... This soul is not yet at peace with itself, one must be
tender with it ... there may be a treasure in that soul....”

Alyosha stopped, because he caught his breath. In spite of his
ill-humor Rakitin looked at him with astonishment. He had never
expected such a tirade from the gentle Alyosha.

“She’s found some one to plead her cause! Why, are you in love with
her? Agrafena Alexandrovna, our monk’s really in love with you, you’ve
made a conquest!” he cried, with a coarse laugh.

Grushenka lifted her head from the pillow and looked at Alyosha with a
tender smile shining on her tear-stained face.

“Let him alone, Alyosha, my cherub; you see what he is, he is not a
person for you to speak to. Mihail Osipovitch,” she turned to Rakitin,
“I meant to beg your pardon for being rude to you, but now I don’t want
to. Alyosha, come to me, sit down here.” She beckoned to him with a
happy smile. “That’s right, sit here. Tell me,” she shook him by the
hand and peeped into his face, smiling, “tell me, do I love that man or
not? the man who wronged me, do I love him or not? Before you came, I
lay here in the dark, asking my heart whether I loved him. Decide for
me, Alyosha, the time has come, it shall be as you say. Am I to forgive
him or not?”

“But you have forgiven him already,” said Alyosha, smiling.

“Yes, I really have forgiven him,” Grushenka murmured thoughtfully.
“What an abject heart! To my abject heart!” She snatched up a glass
from the table, emptied it at a gulp, lifted it in the air and flung it
on the floor. The glass broke with a crash. A little cruel line came
into her smile.

“Perhaps I haven’t forgiven him, though,” she said, with a sort of
menace in her voice, and she dropped her eyes to the ground as though
she were talking to herself. “Perhaps my heart is only getting ready to
forgive. I shall struggle with my heart. You see, Alyosha, I’ve grown
to love my tears in these five years.... Perhaps I only love my
resentment, not him ...”

“Well, I shouldn’t care to be in his shoes,” hissed Rakitin.

“Well, you won’t be, Rakitin, you’ll never be in his shoes. You shall
black my shoes, Rakitin, that’s the place you are fit for. You’ll never
get a woman like me ... and he won’t either, perhaps ...”

“Won’t he? Then why are you dressed up like that?” said Rakitin, with a
venomous sneer.

“Don’t taunt me with dressing up, Rakitin, you don’t know all that is
in my heart! If I choose to tear off my finery, I’ll tear it off at
once, this minute,” she cried in a resonant voice. “You don’t know what
that finery is for, Rakitin! Perhaps I shall see him and say: ‘Have you
ever seen me look like this before?’ He left me a thin, consumptive
cry-baby of seventeen. I’ll sit by him, fascinate him and work him up.
‘Do you see what I am like now?’ I’ll say to him; ‘well, and that’s
enough for you, my dear sir, there’s many a slip twixt the cup and the
lip!’ That may be what the finery is for, Rakitin.” Grushenka finished
with a malicious laugh. “I’m violent and resentful, Alyosha, I’ll tear
off my finery, I’ll destroy my beauty, I’ll scorch my face, slash it
with a knife, and turn beggar. If I choose, I won’t go anywhere now to
see any one. If I choose, I’ll send Kuzma back all he has ever given
me, to-morrow, and all his money and I’ll go out charing for the rest
of my life. You think I wouldn’t do it, Rakitin, that I would not dare
to do it? I would, I would, I could do it directly, only don’t
exasperate me ... and I’ll send him about his business, I’ll snap my
fingers in his face, he shall never see me again!”

She uttered the last words in an hysterical scream, but broke down
again, hid her face in her hands, buried it in the pillow and shook
with sobs.

Rakitin got up.

“It’s time we were off,” he said, “it’s late, we shall be shut out of
the monastery.”

Grushenka leapt up from her place.

“Surely you don’t want to go, Alyosha!” she cried, in mournful
surprise. “What are you doing to me? You’ve stirred up my feeling,
tortured me, and now you’ll leave me to face this night alone!”

“He can hardly spend the night with you! Though if he wants to, let
him! I’ll go alone,” Rakitin scoffed jeeringly.

“Hush, evil tongue!” Grushenka cried angrily at him; “you never said
such words to me as he has come to say.”

“What has he said to you so special?” asked Rakitin irritably.

“I can’t say, I don’t know. I don’t know what he said to me, it went
straight to my heart; he has wrung my heart.... He is the first, the
only one who has pitied me, that’s what it is. Why did you not come
before, you angel?” She fell on her knees before him as though in a
sudden frenzy. “I’ve been waiting all my life for some one like you, I
knew that some one like you would come and forgive me. I believed that,
nasty as I am, some one would really love me, not only with a shameful
love!”

“What have I done to you?” answered Alyosha, bending over her with a
tender smile, and gently taking her by the hands; “I only gave you an
onion, nothing but a tiny little onion, that was all!”

He was moved to tears himself as he said it. At that moment there was a
sudden noise in the passage, some one came into the hall. Grushenka
jumped up, seeming greatly alarmed. Fenya ran noisily into the room,
crying out:

“Mistress, mistress darling, a messenger has galloped up,” she cried,
breathless and joyful. “A carriage from Mokroe for you, Timofey the
driver, with three horses, they are just putting in fresh horses.... A
letter, here’s the letter, mistress.”

A letter was in her hand and she waved it in the air all the while she
talked. Grushenka snatched the letter from her and carried it to the
candle. It was only a note, a few lines. She read it in one instant.

“He has sent for me,” she cried, her face