 reflection, you know, I’d better speak quietly, for
here—here—you can never tell what ears are listening. I will explain
everything; as they say, ‘the story will be continued.’ Why have I been
longing for you? Why have I been thirsting for you all these days, and
just now? (It’s five days since I’ve cast anchor here.) Because it’s
only to you I can tell everything; because I must, because I need you,
because to-morrow I shall fly from the clouds, because to-morrow life
is ending and beginning. Have you ever felt, have you ever dreamt of
falling down a precipice into a pit? That’s just how I’m falling, but
not in a dream. And I’m not afraid, and don’t you be afraid. At least,
I am afraid, but I enjoy it. It’s not enjoyment though, but ecstasy.
Damn it all, whatever it is! A strong spirit, a weak spirit, a womanish
spirit—whatever it is! Let us praise nature: you see what sunshine, how
clear the sky is, the leaves are all green, it’s still summer; four
o’clock in the afternoon and the stillness! Where were you going?”

“I was going to father’s, but I meant to go to Katerina Ivanovna’s
first.”

“To her, and to father! Oo! what a coincidence! Why was I waiting for
you? Hungering and thirsting for you in every cranny of my soul and
even in my ribs? Why, to send you to father and to her, Katerina
Ivanovna, so as to have done with her and with father. To send an
angel. I might have sent any one, but I wanted to send an angel. And
here you are on your way to see father and her.”

“Did you really mean to send me?” cried Alyosha with a distressed
expression.

“Stay! You knew it! And I see you understand it all at once. But be
quiet, be quiet for a time. Don’t be sorry, and don’t cry.”

Dmitri stood up, thought a moment, and put his finger to his forehead.

“She’s asked you, written to you a letter or something, that’s why
you’re going to her? You wouldn’t be going except for that?”

“Here is her note.” Alyosha took it out of his pocket. Mitya looked
through it quickly.

“And you were going the back-way! Oh, gods, I thank you for sending him
by the back-way, and he came to me like the golden fish to the silly
old fishermen in the fable! Listen, Alyosha, listen, brother! Now I
mean to tell you everything, for I must tell some one. An angel in
heaven I’ve told already; but I want to tell an angel on earth. You are
an angel on earth. You will hear and judge and forgive. And that’s what
I need, that some one above me should forgive. Listen! If two people
break away from everything on earth and fly off into the unknown, or at
least one of them, and before flying off or going to ruin he comes to
some one else and says, ‘Do this for me’—some favor never asked before
that could only be asked on one’s deathbed—would that other refuse, if
he were a friend or a brother?”

“I will do it, but tell me what it is, and make haste,” said Alyosha.

“Make haste! H’m!... Don’t be in a hurry, Alyosha, you hurry and worry
yourself. There’s no need to hurry now. Now the world has taken a new
turning. Ah, Alyosha, what a pity you can’t understand ecstasy. But
what am I saying to him? As though you didn’t understand it. What an
ass I am! What am I saying? ‘Be noble, O man!’—who says that?”

Alyosha made up his mind to wait. He felt that, perhaps, indeed, his
work lay here. Mitya sank into thought for a moment, with his elbow on
the table and his head in his hand. Both were silent.

“Alyosha,” said Mitya, “you’re the only one who won’t laugh. I should
like to begin—my confession—with Schiller’s _Hymn to Joy_, _An die
Freude_! I don’t know German, I only know it’s called that. Don’t think
I’m talking nonsense because I’m drunk. I’m not a bit drunk. Brandy’s
all very well, but I need two bottles to make me drunk:

Silenus with his rosy phiz
Upon his stumbling ass.


But I’ve not drunk a quarter of a bottle, and I’m not Silenus. I’m not
Silenus, though I am strong,[1] for I’ve made a decision once for all.
Forgive me the pun; you’ll have to forgive me a lot more than puns
to-day. Don’t be uneasy. I’m not spinning it out. I’m talking sense,
and I’ll come to the point in a minute. I won’t keep you in suspense.
Stay, how does it go?”

He raised his head, thought a minute, and began with enthusiasm:

“Wild and fearful in his cavern
Hid the naked troglodyte,
And the homeless nomad wandered
Laying waste the fertile plain.
Menacing with spear and arrow
In the woods the hunter strayed....
Woe to all poor wretches stranded
On those cruel and hostile shores!

“From the peak of high Olympus
Came the mother Ceres down,
Seeking in those savage regions
Her lost daughter Proserpine.
But the Goddess found no refuge,
Found no kindly welcome there,
And no temple bearing witness
To the worship of the gods.

“From the fields and from the vineyards
Came no fruits to deck the feasts,
Only flesh of bloodstained victims
Smoldered on the altar-fires,
And where’er the grieving goddess
Turns her melancholy gaze,
Sunk in vilest degradation
Man his loathsomeness displays.”


Mitya broke into sobs and seized Alyosha’s hand.

“My dear, my dear, in degradation, in degradation now, too. There’s a
terrible amount of suffering for man on earth, a terrible lot of
trouble. Don’t think I’m only a brute in an officer’s uniform,
wallowing in dirt and drink. I hardly think of anything but of that
degraded man—if only I’m not lying. I pray God I’m not lying and
showing off. I think about that man because I am that man myself.

Would he purge his soul from vileness
And attain to light and worth,
He must turn and cling for ever
To his ancient Mother Earth.


But the difficulty is how am I to cling for ever to Mother Earth. I
don’t kiss her. I don’t cleave to her bosom. Am I to become a peasant
or a shepherd? I go on and I don’t know whether I’m going to shame or
to light and joy. That’s the trouble, for everything in the world is a
riddle! And whenever I’ve happened to sink into the vilest degradation
(and it’s always been happening) I always read that poem about Ceres
and man. Has it reformed me? Never! For I’m a Karamazov. For when I do
leap into the pit, I go headlong with my heels up, and am pleased to be
falling in that degrading attitude, and pride myself upon it. And in
the very depths of that degradation I begin a hymn of praise. Let me be
accursed. Let me be vile and base, only let me kiss the hem of the veil
in which my God is shrouded. Though I may be following the devil, I am
Thy son, O Lord, and I love Thee, and I feel the joy without which the
world cannot stand.

Joy everlasting fostereth
The soul of all creation,
It is her secret ferment fires
The cup of life with flame.
’Tis at her beck the grass hath turned
Each blade towards the light
And solar systems have evolved
From chaos and dark night,
Filling the realms of boundless space
Beyond the sage’s sight.
At bounteous Nature’s kindly breast,
All things that breathe drink Joy,
And birds and beasts and creeping things
All follow where She leads.
Her gifts to man are friends in need,
The wreath, the foaming must,
To angels—vision of God’s throne,
To insects—sensual lust.


But enough poetry! I am in tears; let me cry. It may be foolishness
that every one would laugh at. But you won’t laugh. Your eyes are
shining, too. Enough poetry. I want to tell you now about the insects
to whom God gave “sensual lust.”

To insects—sensual lust.


I am that insect, brother, and it is said of me specially. All we
Karamazovs are such insects, and, angel as you are, that insect lives
in you, too, and will stir up a tempest in your blood. Tempests,
because sensual lust is a tempest—worse than a tempest! Beauty is a
terrible and awful thing! It is terrible because it has not been
fathomed and never can be fathomed, for God sets us nothing but
riddles. Here the boundaries meet and all contradictions exist side by
side. I am not a cultivated man, brother, but I’ve thought a lot about
this. It’s terrible what mysteries there are! Too many riddles weigh
men down on earth. We must solve them as we can, and try to keep a dry
skin in the water. Beauty! I can’t endure the thought that a man of
lofty mind and heart begins with the ideal of the Madonna and ends with
the ideal of Sodom. What’s still more awful is that a man with the
ideal of Sodom in his soul does not renounce the ideal of the Madonna,
and his heart may be on fire with that ideal, genuinely on fire, just
as in his days of youth and innocence. Yes, man is broad, too broad,
indeed. I’d have him narrower. The devil only knows what to make of it!
What to the mind is shameful is beauty and nothing else to the heart.
Is there beauty in Sodom? Believe me, that for the immense mass of
mankind beauty is found in Sodom. Did you know that secret? The awful
thing is that beauty is mysterious as well as terrible. God and the
devil are fighting there and the battlefield is the heart of man. But a
man always talks of his own ache. Listen, now to come to facts.”




Chapter IV.
The Confession Of A Passionate Heart—In Anecdote


“I was leading a wild life then. Father said just now that I spent
several thousand roubles in seducing young girls. That’s a swinish
invention, and there was nothing of the sort. And if there was, I
didn’t need money simply for _that_. With me money is an accessory, the
overflow of my heart, the framework. To-day she would be my lady,
to-morrow a wench out of the streets in her place. I entertained them
both. I threw away money by the handful on music, rioting, and gypsies.
Sometimes I gave it to the ladies, too, for they’ll take it greedily,
that must be admitted, and be pleased and thankful for it. Ladies used
to be fond of me: not all of them, but it happened, it happened. But I
always liked side-paths, little dark back-alleys behind the main
road—there one finds adventures and surprises, and precious metal in
the dirt. I am speaking figuratively, brother. In the town I was in,
there were no such back-alleys in the literal sense, but morally there
were. If you were like me, you’d know what that means. I loved vice, I
loved the ignominy of vice. I loved cruelty; am I not a bug, am I not a
noxious insect? In fact a Karamazov! Once we went, a whole lot of us,
for a picnic, in seven sledges. It was dark, it was winter, and I began
squeezing a girl’s hand, and forced her to kiss me. She was the
daughter of an official, a sweet, gentle, submissive creature. She
allowed me, she allowed me much in the dark. She thought, poor thing,
that I should come next day to make her an offer (I was looked upon as
a good match, too). But I didn’t say a word to her for five months. I
used to see her in a corner at dances (we were always having dances),
her eyes watching me. I saw how they glowed with fire—a fire of gentle
indignation. This game only tickled that insect lust I cherished in my
soul. Five months later she married an official and left the town,
still angry, and still, perhaps, in love with me. Now they live
happily. Observe that I told no one. I didn’t boast of it. Though I’m
full of low desires, and love what’s low, I’m not dishonorable. You’re
blushing; your eyes flashed. Enough of this filth with you. And all
this was nothing much—wayside blossoms _à la_ Paul de Kock—though the
cruel insect had already grown strong in my soul. I’ve a perfect album
of reminiscences, brother. God bless them, the darlings. I tried to
break it off without quarreling. And I never gave them away. I never
bragged of one of them. But that’s enough. You can’t suppose I brought
you here simply to talk of such nonsense. No, I’m going to tell you
something more curious; and don’t be surprised that I’m glad to tell
you, instead of being ashamed.”

“You say that because I blushed,” Alyosha said suddenly. “I wasn’t
blushing at what you were saying or at what you’ve done. I blushed
because I am the same as you are.”

“You? Come, that’s going a little too far!”

“No, it’s not too far,” said Alyosha warmly (obviously the idea was not
a new one). “The ladder’s the same. I’m at the bottom step, and you’re
above, somewhere about the thirteenth. That’s how I see it. But it’s
all the same. Absolutely the same in kind. Any one on the bottom step
is bound to go up to the top one.”

“Then one ought not to step on at all.”

“Any one who can help it had better not.”

“But can you?”

“I think not.”

“Hush, Alyosha, hush, darling! I could kiss your hand, you touch me so.
That rogue Grushenka has an eye for men. She told me once that she’d
devour you one day. There, there, I won’t! From this field of
corruption fouled by flies, let’s pass to my tragedy, also befouled by
flies, that is by every sort of vileness. Although the old man told
lies about my seducing innocence, there really was something of the
sort in my tragedy, though it was only once, and then it did not come
off. The old man who has reproached me with what never happened does
not even know of this fact; I never told any one about it. You’re the
first, except Ivan, of course—Ivan knows everything. He knew about it
long before you. But Ivan’s a tomb.”

“Ivan’s a tomb?”

“Yes.”

Alyosha listened with great attention.

“I was lieutenant in a line regiment, but still I was under
supervision, like a kind of convict. Yet I was awfully well received in
the little town. I spent money right and left. I was thought to be
rich; I thought so myself. But I must have pleased them in other ways
as well. Although they shook their heads over me, they liked me. My
colonel, who was an old man, took a sudden dislike to me. He was always
down upon me, but I had powerful friends, and, moreover, all the town
was on my side, so he couldn’t do me much harm. I was in fault myself
for refusing to treat him with proper respect. I was proud. This
obstinate old fellow, who was really a very good sort, kind-hearted and
hospitable, had had two wives, both dead. His first wife, who was of a
humble family, left a daughter as unpretentious as herself. She was a
young woman of four and twenty when I was there, and was living with
her father and an aunt, her mother’s sister. The aunt was simple and
illiterate; the niece was simple but lively. I like to say nice things
about people. I never knew a woman of more charming character than
Agafya—fancy, her name was Agafya Ivanovna! And she wasn’t bad-looking
either, in the Russian style: tall, stout, with a full figure, and
beautiful eyes, though a rather coarse face. She had not married,
although she had had two suitors. She refused them, but was as cheerful
as ever. I was intimate with her, not in ‘that’ way, it was pure
friendship. I have often been friendly with women quite innocently. I
used to talk to her with shocking frankness, and she only laughed. Many
women like such freedom, and she was a girl too, which made it very
amusing. Another thing, one could never think of her as a young lady.
She and her aunt lived in her father’s house with a sort of voluntary
humility, not putting themselves on an equality with other people. She
was a general favorite, and of use to every one, for she was a clever
dressmaker. She had a talent for it. She gave her services freely
without asking for payment, but if any one offered her payment, she
didn’t refuse. The colonel, of course, was a very different matter. He
was one of the chief personages in the district. He kept open house,
entertained the whole town, gave suppers and dances. At the time I
arrived and joined the battalion, all the town was talking of the
expected return of the colonel’s second daughter, a great beauty, who
had just left a fashionable school in the capital. This second daughter
is Katerina Ivanovna, and she was the child of the second wife, who
belonged to a distinguished general’s family; although, as I learnt on
good authority, she too brought the colonel no money. She had
connections, and that was all. There may have been expectations, but
they had come to nothing.

“Yet, when the young lady came from boarding-school on a visit, the
whole town revived. Our most distinguished ladies—two ‘Excellencies’
and a colonel’s wife—and all the rest following their lead, at once
took her up and