 had utterly forgotten how he
had scared and hurt her just now. He fell to questioning Fenya with an
extreme preciseness, astonishing in his position, and though the girl
looked wildly at his blood-stained hands, she, too, with wonderful
readiness and rapidity, answered every question as though eager to put
the whole truth and nothing but the truth before him. Little by little,
even with a sort of enjoyment, she began explaining every detail, not
wanting to torment him, but, as it were, eager to be of the utmost
service to him. She described the whole of that day, in great detail,
the visit of Rakitin and Alyosha, how she, Fenya, had stood on the
watch, how the mistress had set off, and how she had called out of the
window to Alyosha to give him, Mitya, her greetings, and to tell him
“to remember for ever how she had loved him for an hour.”

Hearing of the message, Mitya suddenly smiled, and there was a flush of
color on his pale cheeks. At the same moment Fenya said to him, not a
bit afraid now to be inquisitive:

“Look at your hands, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. They’re all over blood!”

“Yes,” answered Mitya mechanically. He looked carelessly at his hands
and at once forgot them and Fenya’s question.

He sank into silence again. Twenty minutes had passed since he had run
in. His first horror was over, but evidently some new fixed
determination had taken possession of him. He suddenly stood up,
smiling dreamily.

“What has happened to you, sir?” said Fenya, pointing to his hands
again. She spoke compassionately, as though she felt very near to him
now in his grief. Mitya looked at his hands again.

“That’s blood, Fenya,” he said, looking at her with a strange
expression. “That’s human blood, and my God! why was it shed? But ...
Fenya ... there’s a fence here” (he looked at her as though setting her
a riddle), “a high fence, and terrible to look at. But at dawn
to-morrow, when the sun rises, Mitya will leap over that fence.... You
don’t understand what fence, Fenya, and, never mind.... You’ll hear
to-morrow and understand ... and now, good-by. I won’t stand in her
way. I’ll step aside, I know how to step aside. Live, my joy.... You
loved me for an hour, remember Mityenka Karamazov so for ever.... She
always used to call me Mityenka, do you remember?”

And with those words he went suddenly out of the kitchen. Fenya was
almost more frightened at this sudden departure than she had been when
he ran in and attacked her.

Just ten minutes later Dmitri went in to Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin, the
young official with whom he had pawned his pistols. It was by now
half-past eight, and Pyotr Ilyitch had finished his evening tea, and
had just put his coat on again to go to the “Metropolis” to play
billiards. Mitya caught him coming out.

Seeing him with his face all smeared with blood, the young man uttered
a cry of surprise.

“Good heavens! What is the matter?”

“I’ve come for my pistols,” said Mitya, “and brought you the money. And
thanks very much. I’m in a hurry, Pyotr Ilyitch, please make haste.”

Pyotr Ilyitch grew more and more surprised; he suddenly caught sight of
a bundle of bank-notes in Mitya’s hand, and what was more, he had
walked in holding the notes as no one walks in and no one carries
money: he had them in his right hand, and held them outstretched as if
to show them. Perhotin’s servant-boy, who met Mitya in the passage,
said afterwards that he walked into the passage in the same way, with
the money outstretched in his hand, so he must have been carrying them
like that even in the streets. They were all rainbow-colored
hundred-rouble notes, and the fingers holding them were covered with
blood.

When Pyotr Ilyitch was questioned later on as to the sum of money, he
said that it was difficult to judge at a glance, but that it might have
been two thousand, or perhaps three, but it was a big, “fat” bundle.
“Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” so he testified afterwards, “seemed unlike
himself, too; not drunk, but, as it were, exalted, lost to everything,
but at the same time, as it were, absorbed, as though pondering and
searching for something and unable to come to a decision. He was in
great haste, answered abruptly and very strangely, and at moments
seemed not at all dejected but quite cheerful.”

“But what _is_ the matter with you? What’s wrong?” cried Pyotr Ilyitch,
looking wildly at his guest. “How is it that you’re all covered with
blood? Have you had a fall? Look at yourself!”

He took him by the elbow and led him to the glass.

Seeing his blood-stained face, Mitya started and scowled wrathfully.

“Damnation! That’s the last straw,” he muttered angrily, hurriedly
changing the notes from his right hand to the left, and impulsively
jerked the handkerchief out of his pocket. But the handkerchief turned
out to be soaked with blood, too (it was the handkerchief he had used
to wipe Grigory’s face). There was scarcely a white spot on it, and it
had not merely begun to dry, but had stiffened into a crumpled ball and
could not be pulled apart. Mitya threw it angrily on the floor.

“Oh, damn it!” he said. “Haven’t you a rag of some sort ... to wipe my
face?”

“So you’re only stained, not wounded? You’d better wash,” said Pyotr
Ilyitch. “Here’s a wash-stand. I’ll pour you out some water.”

“A wash-stand? That’s all right ... but where am I to put this?”

With the strangest perplexity he indicated his bundle of hundred-rouble
notes, looking inquiringly at Pyotr Ilyitch as though it were for him
to decide what he, Mitya, was to do with his own money.

“In your pocket, or on the table here. They won’t be lost.”

“In my pocket? Yes, in my pocket. All right.... But, I say, that’s all
nonsense,” he cried, as though suddenly coming out of his absorption.
“Look here, let’s first settle that business of the pistols. Give them
back to me. Here’s your money ... because I am in great need of them
... and I haven’t a minute, a minute to spare.”

And taking the topmost note from the bundle he held it out to Pyotr
Ilyitch.

“But I shan’t have change enough. Haven’t you less?”

“No,” said Mitya, looking again at the bundle, and as though not
trusting his own words he turned over two or three of the topmost ones.

“No, they’re all alike,” he added, and again he looked inquiringly at
Pyotr Ilyitch.

“How have you grown so rich?” the latter asked. “Wait, I’ll send my boy
to Plotnikov’s, they close late—to see if they won’t change it. Here,
Misha!” he called into the passage.

“To Plotnikov’s shop—first-rate!” cried Mitya, as though struck by an
idea. “Misha,” he turned to the boy as he came in, “look here, run to
Plotnikov’s and tell them that Dmitri Fyodorovitch sends his greetings,
and will be there directly.... But listen, listen, tell them to have
champagne, three dozen bottles, ready before I come, and packed as it
was to take to Mokroe. I took four dozen with me then,” he added
(suddenly addressing Pyotr Ilyitch); “they know all about it, don’t you
trouble, Misha,” he turned again to the boy. “Stay, listen; tell them
to put in cheese, Strasburg pies, smoked fish, ham, caviare, and
everything, everything they’ve got, up to a hundred roubles, or a
hundred and twenty as before.... But wait: don’t let them forget
dessert, sweets, pears, water-melons, two or three or four—no, one
melon’s enough, and chocolate, candy, toffee, fondants; in fact,
everything I took to Mokroe before, three hundred roubles’ worth with
the champagne ... let it be just the same again. And remember, Misha,
if you are called Misha—His name is Misha, isn’t it?” He turned to
Pyotr Ilyitch again.

“Wait a minute,” Protr Ilyitch intervened, listening and watching him
uneasily, “you’d better go yourself and tell them. He’ll muddle it.”

“He will, I see he will! Eh, Misha! Why, I was going to kiss you for
the commission.... If you don’t make a mistake, there’s ten roubles for
you, run along, make haste.... Champagne’s the chief thing, let them
bring up champagne. And brandy, too, and red and white wine, and all I
had then.... They know what I had then.”

“But listen!” Pyotr Ilyitch interrupted with some impatience. “I say,
let him simply run and change the money and tell them not to close, and
you go and tell them.... Give him your note. Be off, Misha! Put your
best leg forward!”

Pyotr Ilyitch seemed to hurry Misha off on purpose, because the boy
remained standing with his mouth and eyes wide open, apparently
understanding little of Mitya’s orders, gazing up with amazement and
terror at his blood-stained face and the trembling bloodstained fingers
that held the notes.

“Well, now come and wash,” said Pyotr Ilyitch sternly. “Put the money
on the table or else in your pocket.... That’s right, come along. But
take off your coat.”

And beginning to help him off with his coat, he cried out again:

“Look, your coat’s covered with blood, too!”

“That ... it’s not the coat. It’s only a little here on the sleeve....
And that’s only here where the handkerchief lay. It must have soaked
through. I must have sat on the handkerchief at Fenya’s, and the
blood’s come through,” Mitya explained at once with a childlike
unconsciousness that was astounding. Pyotr Ilyitch listened, frowning.

“Well, you must have been up to something; you must have been fighting
with some one,” he muttered.

They began to wash. Pyotr Ilyitch held the jug and poured out the
water. Mitya, in desperate haste, scarcely soaped his hands (they were
trembling, and Pyotr Ilyitch remembered it afterwards). But the young
official insisted on his soaping them thoroughly and rubbing them more.
He seemed to exercise more and more sway over Mitya, as time went on.
It may be noted in passing that he was a young man of sturdy character.

“Look, you haven’t got your nails clean. Now rub your face; here, on
your temples, by your ear.... Will you go in that shirt? Where are you
going? Look, all the cuff of your right sleeve is covered with blood.”

“Yes, it’s all bloody,” observed Mitya, looking at the cuff of his
shirt.

“Then change your shirt.”

“I haven’t time. You see I’ll ...” Mitya went on with the same
confiding ingenuousness, drying his face and hands on the towel, and
putting on his coat. “I’ll turn it up at the wrist. It won’t be seen
under the coat.... You see!”

“Tell me now, what game have you been up to? Have you been fighting
with some one? In the tavern again, as before? Have you been beating
that captain again?” Pyotr Ilyitch asked him reproachfully. “Whom have
you been beating now ... or killing, perhaps?”

“Nonsense!” said Mitya.

“Why ‘nonsense’?”

“Don’t worry,” said Mitya, and he suddenly laughed. “I smashed an old
woman in the market-place just now.”

“Smashed? An old woman?”

“An old man!” cried Mitya, looking Pyotr Ilyitch straight in the face,
laughing, and shouting at him as though he were deaf.

“Confound it! An old woman, an old man.... Have you killed some one?”

“We made it up. We had a row—and made it up. In a place I know of. We
parted friends. A fool.... He’s forgiven me.... He’s sure to have
forgiven me by now ... if he had got up, he wouldn’t have forgiven
me”—Mitya suddenly winked—“only damn him, you know, I say, Pyotr
Ilyitch, damn him! Don’t worry about him! I don’t want to just now!”
Mitya snapped out, resolutely.

“Whatever do you want to go picking quarrels with every one for? ...
Just as you did with that captain over some nonsense.... You’ve been
fighting and now you’re rushing off on the spree—that’s you all over!
Three dozen champagne—what do you want all that for?”

“Bravo! Now give me the pistols. Upon my honor I’ve no time now. I
should like to have a chat with you, my dear boy, but I haven’t the
time. And there’s no need, it’s too late for talking. Where’s my money?
Where have I put it?” he cried, thrusting his hands into his pockets.

“You put it on the table ... yourself.... Here it is. Had you
forgotten? Money’s like dirt or water to you, it seems. Here are your
pistols. It’s an odd thing, at six o’clock you pledged them for ten
roubles, and now you’ve got thousands. Two or three I should say.”

“Three, you bet,” laughed Mitya, stuffing the notes into the
side-pocket of his trousers.

“You’ll lose it like that. Have you found a gold-mine?”

“The mines? The gold-mines?” Mitya shouted at the top of his voice and
went off into a roar of laughter. “Would you like to go to the mines,
Perhotin? There’s a lady here who’ll stump up three thousand for you,
if only you’ll go. She did it for me, she’s so awfully fond of
gold-mines. Do you know Madame Hohlakov?”

“I don’t know her, but I’ve heard of her and seen her. Did she really
give you three thousand? Did she really?” said Pyotr Ilyitch, eyeing
him dubiously.

“As soon as the sun rises to-morrow, as soon as Phœbus, ever young,
flies upwards, praising and glorifying God, you go to her, this Madame
Hohlakov, and ask her whether she did stump up that three thousand or
not. Try and find out.”

“I don’t know on what terms you are ... since you say it so positively,
I suppose she did give it to you. You’ve got the money in your hand,
but instead of going to Siberia you’re spending it all.... Where are
you really off to now, eh?”

“To Mokroe.”

“To Mokroe? But it’s night!”

“Once the lad had all, now the lad has naught,” cried Mitya suddenly.

“How ‘naught’? You say that with all those thousands!”

“I’m not talking about thousands. Damn thousands! I’m talking of the
female character.

Fickle is the heart of woman
Treacherous and full of vice;


I agree with Ulysses. That’s what he says.”

“I don’t understand you!”

“Am I drunk?”

“Not drunk, but worse.”

“I’m drunk in spirit, Pyotr Ilyitch, drunk in spirit! But that’s
enough!”

“What are you doing, loading the pistol?”

“I’m loading the pistol.”

Unfastening the pistol-case, Mitya actually opened the powder horn, and
carefully sprinkled and rammed in the charge. Then he took the bullet
and, before inserting it, held it in two fingers in front of the
candle.

“Why are you looking at the bullet?” asked Pyotr Ilyitch, watching him
with uneasy curiosity.

“Oh, a fancy. Why, if you meant to put that bullet in your brain, would
you look at it or not?”

“Why look at it?”

“It’s going into my brain, so it’s interesting to look and see what
it’s like. But that’s foolishness, a moment’s foolishness. Now that’s
done,” he added, putting in the bullet and driving it home with the
ramrod. “Pyotr Ilyitch, my dear fellow, that’s nonsense, all nonsense,
and if only you knew what nonsense! Give me a little piece of paper
now.”

“Here’s some paper.”

“No, a clean new piece, writing-paper. That’s right.”

And taking a pen from the table, Mitya rapidly wrote two lines, folded
the paper in four, and thrust it in his waistcoat pocket. He put the
pistols in the case, locked it up, and kept it in his hand. Then he
looked at Pyotr Ilyitch with a slow, thoughtful smile.

“Now, let’s go.”

“Where are we going? No, wait a minute.... Are you thinking of putting
that bullet in your brain, perhaps?” Pyotr Ilyitch asked uneasily.

“I was fooling about the bullet! I want to live. I love life! You may
be sure of that. I love golden-haired Phœbus and his warm light....
Dear Pyotr Ilyitch, do you know how to step aside?”

“What do you mean by ‘stepping aside’?”

“Making way. Making way for a dear creature, and for one I hate. And to
let the one I hate become dear—that’s what making way means! And to say
to them: God bless you, go your way, pass on, while I—”

“While you—?”

“That’s enough, let’s go.”

“Upon my word. I’ll tell some one to prevent your going there,” said
Pyotr Ilyitch, looking at him. “What are you going to Mokroe for, now?”

“There’s a woman there, a woman. That’s enough for you. You shut up.”

“Listen, though you’re such a savage I’ve always liked you.... I feel
anxious.”

“Thanks, old fellow. I’m a savage you say. Savages, savages! That’s
what I am always saying. Savages! Why, here’s Misha! I was forgetting
him.”

Misha ran in, post-haste, with a handful of notes in change, and
reported that every one was in a bustle at the Plotnikovs’; “They’re
carrying down the bottles, and the fish, and the tea; it will all be
ready directly.” Mitya seized ten roubles and handed it to Pyotr
Ilyitch, then tossed another ten-rouble note to Misha.

“Don’t dare to do such a thing!” cried Pyotr Ilyitch. “I won’t have it
in my house, it’s a bad, demoralizing habit. Put your money away. Here,
put it here, why waste it? It would come in handy to-morrow, and I dare
say you’ll be coming to me to borrow ten roubles again. Why do you keep
putting the notes in your side-pocket? Ah, you’ll lose them!”

“I say, my dear fellow, let’s go to Mokroe together.”

“What should I go for?”

“I say, let’s open a bottle at once, and drink to life! I want to
drink, and especially to drink with you. I’ve never drunk with you,
have I?”

“Very well,