 to tell, Alexey.” He smiled bitterly again. “Only ...
only Grusha, Grusha! Good Lord! Why should she have such suffering to
bear?” he exclaimed suddenly, with tears. “Grusha’s killing me; the
thought of her’s killing me, killing me. She was with me just now....”

“She told me she was very much grieved by you to-day.”

“I know. Confound my temper! It was jealousy. I was sorry, I kissed her
as she was going. I didn’t ask her forgiveness.”

“Why didn’t you?” exclaimed Alyosha.

Suddenly Mitya laughed almost mirthfully.

“God preserve you, my dear boy, from ever asking forgiveness for a
fault from a woman you love. From one you love especially, however
greatly you may have been in fault. For a woman—devil only knows what
to make of a woman! I know something about them, anyway. But try
acknowledging you are in fault to a woman. Say, ‘I am sorry, forgive
me,’ and a shower of reproaches will follow! Nothing will make her
forgive you simply and directly, she’ll humble you to the dust, bring
forward things that have never happened, recall everything, forget
nothing, add something of her own, and only then forgive you. And even
the best, the best of them do it. She’ll scrape up all the scrapings
and load them on your head. They are ready to flay you alive, I tell
you, every one of them, all these angels without whom we cannot live! I
tell you plainly and openly, dear boy, every decent man ought to be
under some woman’s thumb. That’s my conviction—not conviction, but
feeling. A man ought to be magnanimous, and it’s no disgrace to a man!
No disgrace to a hero, not even a Cæsar! But don’t ever beg her pardon
all the same for anything. Remember that rule given you by your brother
Mitya, who’s come to ruin through women. No, I’d better make it up to
Grusha somehow, without begging pardon. I worship her, Alexey, worship
her. Only she doesn’t see it. No, she still thinks I don’t love her
enough. And she tortures me, tortures me with her love. The past was
nothing! In the past it was only those infernal curves of hers that
tortured me, but now I’ve taken all her soul into my soul and through
her I’ve become a man myself. Will they marry us? If they don’t, I
shall die of jealousy. I imagine something every day.... What did she
say to you about me?”

Alyosha repeated all Grushenka had said to him that day. Mitya
listened, made him repeat things, and seemed pleased.

“Then she is not angry at my being jealous?” he exclaimed. “She is a
regular woman! ‘I’ve a fierce heart myself!’ Ah, I love such fierce
hearts, though I can’t bear any one’s being jealous of me. I can’t
endure it. We shall fight. But I shall love her, I shall love her
infinitely. Will they marry us? Do they let convicts marry? That’s the
question. And without her I can’t exist....”

Mitya walked frowning across the room. It was almost dark. He suddenly
seemed terribly worried.

“So there’s a secret, she says, a secret? We have got up a plot against
her, and Katya is mixed up in it, she thinks. No, my good Grushenka,
that’s not it. You are very wide of the mark, in your foolish feminine
way. Alyosha, darling, well, here goes! I’ll tell you our secret!”

He looked round, went close up quickly to Alyosha, who was standing
before him, and whispered to him with an air of mystery, though in
reality no one could hear them: the old warder was dozing in the
corner, and not a word could reach the ears of the soldiers on guard.

“I will tell you all our secret,” Mitya whispered hurriedly. “I meant
to tell you later, for how could I decide on anything without you? You
are everything to me. Though I say that Ivan is superior to us, you are
my angel. It’s your decision will decide it. Perhaps it’s you that is
superior and not Ivan. You see, it’s a question of conscience, question
of the higher conscience—the secret is so important that I can’t settle
it myself, and I’ve put it off till I could speak to you. But anyway
it’s too early to decide now, for we must wait for the verdict. As soon
as the verdict is given, you shall decide my fate. Don’t decide it now.
I’ll tell you now. You listen, but don’t decide. Stand and keep quiet.
I won’t tell you everything. I’ll only tell you the idea, without
details, and you keep quiet. Not a question, not a movement. You agree?
But, goodness, what shall I do with your eyes? I’m afraid your eyes
will tell me your decision, even if you don’t speak. Oo! I’m afraid!
Alyosha, listen! Ivan suggests my _escaping_. I won’t tell you the
details: it’s all been thought out: it can all be arranged. Hush, don’t
decide. I should go to America with Grusha. You know I can’t live
without Grusha! What if they won’t let her follow me to Siberia? Do
they let convicts get married? Ivan thinks not. And without Grusha what
should I do there underground with a hammer? I should only smash my
skull with the hammer! But, on the other hand, my conscience? I should
have run away from suffering. A sign has come, I reject the sign. I
have a way of salvation and I turn my back on it. Ivan says that in
America, ‘with the good-will,’ I can be of more use than underground.
But what becomes of our hymn from underground? What’s America? America
is vanity again! And there’s a lot of swindling in America, too, I
expect. I should have run away from crucifixion! I tell you, you know,
Alexey, because you are the only person who can understand this.
There’s no one else. It’s folly, madness to others, all I’ve told you
of the hymn. They’ll say I’m out of my mind or a fool. I am not out of
my mind and I am not a fool. Ivan understands about the hymn, too. He
understands, only he doesn’t answer—he doesn’t speak. He doesn’t
believe in the hymn. Don’t speak, don’t speak. I see how you look! You
have already decided. Don’t decide, spare me! I can’t live without
Grusha. Wait till after the trial!”

Mitya ended beside himself. He held Alyosha with both hands on his
shoulders, and his yearning, feverish eyes were fixed on his brother’s.

“They don’t let convicts marry, do they?” he repeated for the third
time in a supplicating voice.

Alyosha listened with extreme surprise and was deeply moved.

“Tell me one thing,” he said. “Is Ivan very keen on it, and whose idea
was it?”

“His, his, and he is very keen on it. He didn’t come to see me at
first, then he suddenly came a week ago and he began about it straight
away. He is awfully keen on it. He doesn’t ask me, but orders me to
escape. He doesn’t doubt of my obeying him, though I showed him all my
heart as I have to you, and told him about the hymn, too. He told me
he’d arrange it; he’s found out about everything. But of that later.
He’s simply set on it. It’s all a matter of money: he’ll pay ten
thousand for escape and give me twenty thousand for America. And he
says we can arrange a magnificent escape for ten thousand.”

“And he told you on no account to tell me?” Alyosha asked again.

“To tell no one, and especially not you; on no account to tell you. He
is afraid, no doubt, that you’ll stand before me as my conscience.
Don’t tell him I told you. Don’t tell him, for anything.”

“You are right,” Alyosha pronounced; “it’s impossible to decide
anything before the trial is over. After the trial you’ll decide of
yourself. Then you’ll find that new man in yourself and he will
decide.”

“A new man, or a Bernard who’ll decide _à la_ Bernard, for I believe
I’m a contemptible Bernard myself,” said Mitya, with a bitter grin.

“But, brother, have you no hope then of being acquitted?”

Mitya shrugged his shoulders nervously and shook his head. “Alyosha,
darling, it’s time you were going,” he said, with a sudden haste.
“There’s the superintendent shouting in the yard. He’ll be here
directly. We are late; it’s irregular. Embrace me quickly. Kiss me!
Sign me with the cross, darling, for the cross I have to bear
to-morrow.”

They embraced and kissed.

“Ivan,” said Mitya suddenly, “suggests my escaping; but, of course, he
believes I did it.”

A mournful smile came on to his lips.

“Have you asked him whether he believes it?” asked Alyosha.

“No, I haven’t. I wanted to, but I couldn’t. I hadn’t the courage. But
I saw it from his eyes. Well, good-by!”

Once more they kissed hurriedly, and Alyosha was just going out, when
Mitya suddenly called him back.

“Stand facing me! That’s right!” And again he seized Alyosha, putting
both hands on his shoulders. His face became suddenly quite pale, so
that it was dreadfully apparent, even through the gathering darkness.
His lips twitched, his eyes fastened upon Alyosha.

“Alyosha, tell me the whole truth, as you would before God. Do you
believe I did it? Do you, do you in yourself, believe it? The whole
truth, don’t lie!” he cried desperately.

Everything seemed heaving before Alyosha, and he felt something like a
stab at his heart.

“Hush! What do you mean?” he faltered helplessly.

“The whole truth, the whole, don’t lie!” repeated Mitya.

“I’ve never for one instant believed that you were the murderer!” broke
in a shaking voice from Alyosha’s breast, and he raised his right hand
in the air, as though calling God to witness his words.

Mitya’s whole face was lighted up with bliss.

“Thank you!” he articulated slowly, as though letting a sigh escape him
after fainting. “Now you have given me new life. Would you believe it,
till this moment I’ve been afraid to ask you, you, even you. Well, go!
You’ve given me strength for to-morrow. God bless you! Come, go along!
Love Ivan!” was Mitya’s last word.

Alyosha went out in tears. Such distrustfulness in Mitya, such lack of
confidence even to him, to Alyosha—all this suddenly opened before
Alyosha an unsuspected depth of hopeless grief and despair in the soul
of his unhappy brother. Intense, infinite compassion overwhelmed him
instantly. There was a poignant ache in his torn heart. “Love Ivan!”—he
suddenly recalled Mitya’s words. And he was going to Ivan. He badly
wanted to see Ivan all day. He was as much worried about Ivan as about
Mitya, and more than ever now.




Chapter V.
Not You, Not You!


On the way to Ivan he had to pass the house where Katerina Ivanovna was
living. There was light in the windows. He suddenly stopped and
resolved to go in. He had not seen Katerina Ivanovna for more than a
week. But now it struck him that Ivan might be with her, especially on
the eve of the terrible day. Ringing, and mounting the staircase, which
was dimly lighted by a Chinese lantern, he saw a man coming down, and
as they met, he recognized him as his brother. So he was just coming
from Katerina Ivanovna.

“Ah, it’s only you,” said Ivan dryly. “Well, good-by! You are going to
her?”

“Yes.”

“I don’t advise you to; she’s upset and you’ll upset her more.”

A door was instantly flung open above, and a voice cried suddenly:

“No, no! Alexey Fyodorovitch, have you come from him?”

“Yes, I have been with him.”

“Has he sent me any message? Come up, Alyosha, and you, Ivan
Fyodorovitch, you must come back, you must. Do you hear?”

There was such a peremptory note in Katya’s voice that Ivan, after a
moment’s hesitation, made up his mind to go back with Alyosha.

“She was listening,” he murmured angrily to himself, but Alyosha heard
it.

“Excuse my keeping my greatcoat on,” said Ivan, going into the 
drawing-room. “I won’t sit down. I won’t stay more than a minute.”

“Sit down, Alexey Fyodorovitch,” said Katerina Ivanovna, though she
remained standing. She had changed very little during this time, but
there was an ominous gleam in her dark eyes. Alyosha remembered
afterwards that she had struck him as particularly handsome at that
moment.

“What did he ask you to tell me?”

“Only one thing,” said Alyosha, looking her straight in the face, “that
you would spare yourself and say nothing at the trial of what” (he was
a little confused) “... passed between you ... at the time of your
first acquaintance ... in that town.”

“Ah! that I bowed down to the ground for that money!” She broke into a
bitter laugh. “Why, is he afraid for me or for himself? He asks me to
spare—whom? Him or myself? Tell me, Alexey Fyodorovitch!”

Alyosha watched her intently, trying to understand her.

“Both yourself and him,” he answered softly.

“I am glad to hear it,” she snapped out maliciously, and she suddenly
blushed.

“You don’t know me yet, Alexey Fyodorovitch,” she said menacingly. “And
I don’t know myself yet. Perhaps you’ll want to trample me under foot
after my examination to-morrow.”

“You will give your evidence honorably,” said Alyosha; “that’s all
that’s wanted.”

“Women are often dishonorable,” she snarled. “Only an hour ago I was
thinking I felt afraid to touch that monster ... as though he were a
reptile ... but no, he is still a human being to me! But did he do it?
Is he the murderer?” she cried, all of a sudden, hysterically, turning
quickly to Ivan. Alyosha saw at once that she had asked Ivan that
question before, perhaps only a moment before he came in, and not for
the first time, but for the hundredth, and that they had ended by
quarreling.

“I’ve been to see Smerdyakov.... It was you, you who persuaded me that
he murdered his father. It’s only you I believed!” she continued, still
addressing Ivan. He gave her a sort of strained smile. Alyosha started
at her tone. He had not suspected such familiar intimacy between them.

“Well, that’s enough, anyway,” Ivan cut short the conversation. “I am
going. I’ll come to-morrow.” And turning at once, he walked out of the
room and went straight downstairs.

With an imperious gesture, Katerina Ivanovna seized Alyosha by both
hands.

“Follow him! Overtake him! Don’t leave him alone for a minute!” she
said, in a hurried whisper. “He’s mad! Don’t you know that he’s mad? He
is in a fever, nervous fever. The doctor told me so. Go, run after
him....”

Alyosha jumped up and ran after Ivan, who was not fifty paces ahead of
him.

“What do you want?” He turned quickly on Alyosha, seeing that he was
running after him. “She told you to catch me up, because I’m mad. I
know it all by heart,” he added irritably.

“She is mistaken, of course; but she is right that you are ill,” said
Alyosha. “I was looking at your face just now. You look very ill,
Ivan.”

Ivan walked on without stopping. Alyosha followed him.

“And do you know, Alexey Fyodorovitch, how people do go out of their
mind?” Ivan asked in a voice suddenly quiet, without a trace of
irritation, with a note of the simplest curiosity.

“No, I don’t. I suppose there are all kinds of insanity.”

“And can one observe that one’s going mad oneself?”

“I imagine one can’t see oneself clearly in such circumstances,”
Alyosha answered with surprise.

Ivan paused for half a minute.

“If you want to talk to me, please change the subject,” he said
suddenly.

“Oh, while I think of it, I have a letter for you,” said Alyosha
timidly, and he took Lise’s note from his pocket and held it out to
Ivan. They were just under a lamp-post. Ivan recognized the handwriting
at once.

“Ah, from that little demon!” he laughed maliciously, and, without
opening the envelope, he tore it into bits and threw it in the air. The
bits were scattered by the wind.

“She’s not sixteen yet, I believe, and already offering herself,” he
said contemptuously, striding along the street again.

“How do you mean, offering herself?” exclaimed Alyosha.

“As wanton women offer themselves, to be sure.”

“How can you, Ivan, how can you?” Alyosha cried warmly, in a grieved
voice. “She is a child; you are insulting a child! She is ill; she is
very ill, too. She is on the verge of insanity, too, perhaps.... I had
hoped to hear something from you ... that would save her.”

“You’ll hear nothing from me. If she is a child I am not her nurse. Be
quiet, Alexey. Don’t go on about her. I am not even thinking about it.”

They were silent again for a moment.

“She will be praying all night now to the Mother of God to show her how
to act to-morrow at the trial,” he said sharply and angrily again.

“You ... you mean Katerina Ivanovna?”

“Yes. Whether she’s to save Mitya or ruin him. She’ll pray for light
from above. She can’t make up her mind for herself, you see. She has
not had time to decide yet. She takes me for her nurse, too. She wants
me to sing lullabies to her.”

“Katerina Ivanovna loves you, brother,” said Alyosha sadly.

“Perhaps; but I am not very keen on her.”

“She is suffering. Why do you ... sometimes say things to her that give
her hope?” Alyosha went on, with timid reproach. “I know that you’ve
given her hope. Forgive me for speaking to you like this,” he added.

“I can’t behave to her as I ought—break off altogether and tell her so
straight