 day he almost saved me from death by coming in the night.
And your friend Rakitin comes in such boots, and always stretches them
out on the carpet.... He began hinting at his feelings, in fact, and
one day, as he was going, he squeezed my hand terribly hard. My foot
began to swell directly after he pressed my hand like that. He had met
Pyotr Ilyitch here before, and would you believe it, he is always
gibing at him, growling at him, for some reason. I simply looked at the
way they went on together and laughed inwardly. So I was sitting here
alone—no, I was laid up then. Well, I was lying here alone and suddenly
Rakitin comes in, and only fancy! brought me some verses of his own
composition—a short poem, on my bad foot: that is, he described my foot
in a poem. Wait a minute—how did it go?

A captivating little foot.


It began somehow like that. I can never remember poetry. I’ve got it
here. I’ll show it to you later. But it’s a charming thing—charming;
and, you know, it’s not only about the foot, it had a good moral, too,
a charming idea, only I’ve forgotten it; in fact, it was just the thing
for an album. So, of course, I thanked him, and he was evidently
flattered. I’d hardly had time to thank him when in comes Pyotr
Ilyitch, and Rakitin suddenly looked as black as night. I could see
that Pyotr Ilyitch was in the way, for Rakitin certainly wanted to say
something after giving me the verses. I had a presentiment of it; but
Pyotr Ilyitch came in. I showed Pyotr Ilyitch the verses and didn’t say
who was the author. But I am convinced that he guessed, though he won’t
own it to this day, and declares he had no idea. But he says that on
purpose. Pyotr Ilyitch began to laugh at once, and fell to criticizing
it. ‘Wretched doggerel,’ he said they were, ‘some divinity student must
have written them,’ and with such vehemence, such vehemence! Then,
instead of laughing, your friend flew into a rage. ‘Good gracious!’ I
thought, ‘they’ll fly at each other.’ ‘It was I who wrote them,’ said
he. ‘I wrote them as a joke,’ he said, ‘for I think it degrading to
write verses.... But they are good poetry. They want to put a monument
to your Pushkin for writing about women’s feet, while I wrote with a
moral purpose, and you,’ said he, ‘are an advocate of serfdom. You’ve
no humane ideas,’ said he. ‘You have no modern enlightened feelings,
you are uninfluenced by progress, you are a mere official,’ he said,
‘and you take bribes.’ Then I began screaming and imploring them. And,
you know, Pyotr Ilyitch is anything but a coward. He at once took up
the most gentlemanly tone, looked at him sarcastically, listened, and
apologized. ‘I’d no idea,’ said he. ‘I shouldn’t have said it, if I had
known. I should have praised it. Poets are all so irritable,’ he said.
In short, he laughed at him under cover of the most gentlemanly tone.
He explained to me afterwards that it was all sarcastic. I thought he
was in earnest. Only as I lay there, just as before you now, I thought,
‘Would it, or would it not, be the proper thing for me to turn Rakitin
out for shouting so rudely at a visitor in my house?’ And, would you
believe it, I lay here, shut my eyes, and wondered, would it be the
proper thing or not. I kept worrying and worrying, and my heart began
to beat, and I couldn’t make up my mind whether to make an outcry or
not. One voice seemed to be telling me, ‘Speak,’ and the other ‘No,
don’t speak.’ And no sooner had the second voice said that than I cried
out, and fainted. Of course, there was a fuss. I got up suddenly and
said to Rakitin, ‘It’s painful for me to say it, but I don’t wish to
see you in my house again.’ So I turned him out. Ah! Alexey
Fyodorovitch, I know myself I did wrong. I was putting it on. I wasn’t
angry with him at all, really; but I suddenly fancied—that was what did
it—that it would be such a fine scene.... And yet, believe me, it was
quite natural, for I really shed tears and cried for several days
afterwards, and then suddenly, one afternoon, I forgot all about it. So
it’s a fortnight since he’s been here, and I kept wondering whether he
would come again. I wondered even yesterday, then suddenly last night
came this _Gossip_. I read it and gasped. Who could have written it? He
must have written it. He went home, sat down, wrote it on the spot,
sent it, and they put it in. It was a fortnight ago, you see. But,
Alyosha, it’s awful how I keep talking and don’t say what I want to
say. Ah! the words come of themselves!”

“It’s very important for me to be in time to see my brother to-day,”
Alyosha faltered.

“To be sure, to be sure! You bring it all back to me. Listen, what is
an aberration?”

“What aberration?” asked Alyosha, wondering.

“In the legal sense. An aberration in which everything is pardonable.
Whatever you do, you will be acquitted at once.”

“What do you mean?”

“I’ll tell you. This Katya ... Ah! she is a charming, charming
creature, only I never can make out who it is she is in love with. She
was with me some time ago and I couldn’t get anything out of her.
Especially as she won’t talk to me except on the surface now. She is
always talking about my health and nothing else, and she takes up such
a tone with me, too. I simply said to myself, ‘Well, so be it. I don’t
care’... Oh, yes. I was talking of aberration. This doctor has come.
You know a doctor has come? Of course, you know it—the one who
discovers madmen. You wrote for him. No, it wasn’t you, but Katya. It’s
all Katya’s doing. Well, you see, a man may be sitting perfectly sane
and suddenly have an aberration. He may be conscious and know what he
is doing and yet be in a state of aberration. And there’s no doubt that
Dmitri Fyodorovitch was suffering from aberration. They found out about
aberration as soon as the law courts were reformed. It’s all the good
effect of the reformed law courts. The doctor has been here and
questioned me about that evening, about the gold mines. ‘How did he
seem then?’ he asked me. He must have been in a state of aberration. He
came in shouting, ‘Money, money, three thousand! Give me three
thousand!’ and then went away and immediately did the murder. ‘I don’t
want to murder him,’ he said, and he suddenly went and murdered him.
That’s why they’ll acquit him, because he struggled against it and yet
he murdered him.”

“But he didn’t murder him,” Alyosha interrupted rather sharply. He felt
more and more sick with anxiety and impatience.

“Yes, I know it was that old man Grigory murdered him.”

“Grigory?” cried Alyosha.

“Yes, yes; it was Grigory. He lay as Dmitri Fyodorovitch struck him
down, and then got up, saw the door open, went in and killed Fyodor
Pavlovitch.”

“But why, why?”

“Suffering from aberration. When he recovered from the blow Dmitri
Fyodorovitch gave him on the head, he was suffering from aberration; he
went and committed the murder. As for his saying he didn’t, he very
likely doesn’t remember. Only, you know, it’ll be better, ever so much
better, if Dmitri Fyodorovitch murdered him. And that’s how it must
have been, though I say it was Grigory. It certainly was Dmitri
Fyodorovitch, and that’s better, ever so much better! Oh! not better
that a son should have killed his father, I don’t defend that. Children
ought to honor their parents, and yet it would be better if it were he,
as you’d have nothing to cry over then, for he did it when he was
unconscious or rather when he was conscious, but did not know what he
was doing. Let them acquit him—that’s so humane, and would show what a
blessing reformed law courts are. I knew nothing about it, but they say
they have been so a long time. And when I heard it yesterday, I was so
struck by it that I wanted to send for you at once. And if he is
acquitted, make him come straight from the law courts to dinner with
me, and I’ll have a party of friends, and we’ll drink to the reformed
law courts. I don’t believe he’d be dangerous; besides, I’ll invite a
great many friends, so that he could always be led out if he did
anything. And then he might be made a justice of the peace or something
in another town, for those who have been in trouble themselves make the
best judges. And, besides, who isn’t suffering from aberration
nowadays?—you, I, all of us are in a state of aberration, and there are
ever so many examples of it: a man sits singing a song, suddenly
something annoys him, he takes a pistol and shoots the first person he
comes across, and no one blames him for it. I read that lately, and all
the doctors confirm it. The doctors are always confirming; they confirm
anything. Why, my Lise is in a state of aberration. She made me cry
again yesterday, and the day before, too, and to-day I suddenly
realized that it’s all due to aberration. Oh, Lise grieves me so! I
believe she’s quite mad. Why did she send for you? Did she send for you
or did you come of yourself?”

“Yes, she sent for me, and I am just going to her.” Alyosha got up
resolutely.

“Oh, my dear, dear Alexey Fyodorovitch, perhaps that’s what’s most
important,” Madame Hohlakov cried, suddenly bursting into tears. “God
knows I trust Lise to you with all my heart, and it’s no matter her
sending for you on the sly, without telling her mother. But forgive me,
I can’t trust my daughter so easily to your brother Ivan Fyodorovitch,
though I still consider him the most chivalrous young man. But only
fancy, he’s been to see Lise and I knew nothing about it!”

“How? What? When?” Alyosha was exceedingly surprised. He had not sat
down again and listened standing.

“I will tell you; that’s perhaps why I asked you to come, for I don’t
know now why I did ask you to come. Well, Ivan Fyodorovitch has been to
see me twice, since he came back from Moscow. First time he came as a
friend to call on me, and the second time Katya was here and he came
because he heard she was here. I didn’t, of course, expect him to come
often, knowing what a lot he has to do as it is, _vous comprenez, cette
affaire et la mort terrible de votre papa_. But I suddenly heard he’d
been here again, not to see me but to see Lise. That’s six days ago
now. He came, stayed five minutes, and went away. And I didn’t hear of
it till three days afterwards, from Glafira, so it was a great shock to
me. I sent for Lise directly. She laughed. ‘He thought you were
asleep,’ she said, ‘and came in to me to ask after your health.’ Of
course, that’s how it happened. But Lise, Lise, mercy on us, how she
distresses me! Would you believe it, one night, four days ago, just
after you saw her last time, and had gone away, she suddenly had a fit,
screaming, shrieking, hysterics! Why is it I never have hysterics?
Then, next day another fit, and the same thing on the third, and
yesterday too, and then yesterday that aberration. She suddenly
screamed out, ‘I hate Ivan Fyodorovitch. I insist on your never letting
him come to the house again.’ I was struck dumb at these amazing words,
and answered, ‘On what grounds could I refuse to see such an excellent
young man, a young man of such learning too, and so unfortunate?’—for
all this business is a misfortune, isn’t it? She suddenly burst out
laughing at my words, and so rudely, you know. Well, I was pleased; I
thought I had amused her and the fits would pass off, especially as I
wanted to refuse to see Ivan Fyodorovitch anyway on account of his
strange visits without my knowledge, and meant to ask him for an
explanation. But early this morning Lise waked up and flew into a
passion with Yulia and, would you believe it, slapped her in the face.
That’s monstrous; I am always polite to my servants. And an hour later
she was hugging Yulia’s feet and kissing them. She sent a message to me
that she wasn’t coming to me at all, and would never come and see me
again, and when I dragged myself down to her, she rushed to kiss me,
crying, and as she kissed me, she pushed me out of the room without
saying a word, so I couldn’t find out what was the matter. Now, dear
Alexey Fyodorovitch, I rest all my hopes on you, and, of course, my
whole life is in your hands. I simply beg you to go to Lise and find
out everything from her, as you alone can, and come back and tell
me—me, her mother, for you understand it will be the death of me,
simply the death of me, if this goes on, or else I shall run away. I
can stand no more. I have patience; but I may lose patience, and then
... then something awful will happen. Ah, dear me! At last, Pyotr
Ilyitch!” cried Madame Hohlakov, beaming all over as she saw Perhotin
enter the room. “You are late, you are late! Well, sit down, speak, put
us out of suspense. What does the counsel say. Where are you off to,
Alexey Fyodorovitch?”

“To Lise.”

“Oh, yes. You won’t forget, you won’t forget what I asked you? It’s a
question of life and death!”

“Of course, I won’t forget, if I can ... but I am so late,” muttered
Alyosha, beating a hasty retreat.

“No, be sure, be sure to come in; don’t say ‘If you can.’ I shall die
if you don’t,” Madame Hohlakov called after him, but Alyosha had
already left the room.




Chapter III.
A Little Demon


Going in to Lise, he found her half reclining in the invalid-chair, in
which she had been wheeled when she was unable to walk. She did not
move to meet him, but her sharp, keen eyes were simply riveted on his
face. There was a feverish look in her eyes, her face was pale and
yellow. Alyosha was amazed at the change that had taken place in her in
three days. She was positively thinner. She did not hold out her hand
to him. He touched the thin, long fingers which lay motionless on her
dress, then he sat down facing her, without a word.

“I know you are in a hurry to get to the prison,” Lise said curtly,
“and mamma’s kept you there for hours; she’s just been telling you
about me and Yulia.”

“How do you know?” asked Alyosha.

“I’ve been listening. Why do you stare at me? I want to listen and I do
listen, there’s no harm in that. I don’t apologize.”

“You are upset about something?”

“On the contrary, I am very happy. I’ve only just been reflecting for
the thirtieth time what a good thing it is I refused you and shall not
be your wife. You are not fit to be a husband. If I were to marry you
and give you a note to take to the man I loved after you, you’d take it
and be sure to give it to him and bring an answer back, too. If you
were forty, you would still go on taking my love-letters for me.”

She suddenly laughed.

“There is something spiteful and yet open-hearted about you,” Alyosha
smiled to her.

“The open-heartedness consists in my not being ashamed of myself with
you. What’s more, I don’t want to feel ashamed with you, just with you.
Alyosha, why is it I don’t respect you? I am very fond of you, but I
don’t respect you. If I respected you, I shouldn’t talk to you without
shame, should I?”

“No.”

“But do you believe that I am not ashamed with you?”

“No, I don’t believe it.”

Lise laughed nervously again; she spoke rapidly.

“I sent your brother, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, some sweets in prison.
Alyosha, you know, you are quite pretty! I shall love you awfully for
having so quickly allowed me not to love you.”

“Why did you send for me to-day, Lise?”

“I wanted to tell you of a longing I have. I should like some one to
torture me, marry me and then torture me, deceive me and go away. I
don’t want to be happy.”

“You are in love with disorder?”

“Yes, I want disorder. I keep wanting to set fire to the house. I keep
imagining how I’ll creep up and set fire to the house on the sly; it
must be on the sly. They’ll try to put it out, but it’ll go on burning.
And I shall know and say nothing. Ah, what silliness! And how bored I
am!”

She waved her hand with a look of repulsion.

“It’s your luxurious life,” said Alyosha, softly.

“Is it better, then, to be poor?”

“Yes, it is better.”

“That’s what your monk taught you. That’s not true. Let me be rich and
all the rest