 and carried off fifteen
hundred roubles. Five hours later he was arrested, and, except fifteen
roubles he had already managed to spend, the whole sum was found on
him. Moreover, the shopman, on his return to the shop after the murder,
informed the police not only of the exact sum stolen, but even of the
notes and gold coins of which that sum was made up, and those very
notes and coins were found on the criminal. This was followed by a full
and genuine confession on the part of the murderer. That’s what I call
evidence, gentlemen of the jury! In that case I know, I see, I touch
the money, and cannot deny its existence. Is it the same in the present
case? And yet it is a question of life and death.

“Yes, I shall be told, but he was carousing that night, squandering
money; he was shown to have had fifteen hundred roubles—where did he
get the money? But the very fact that only fifteen hundred could be
found, and the other half of the sum could nowhere be discovered, shows
that that money was not the same, and had never been in any envelope.
By strict calculation of time it was proved at the preliminary inquiry
that the prisoner ran straight from those women servants to Perhotin’s
without going home, and that he had been nowhere. So he had been all
the time in company and therefore could not have divided the three
thousand in half and hidden half in the town. It’s just this
consideration that has led the prosecutor to assume that the money is
hidden in some crevice at Mokroe. Why not in the dungeons of the castle
of Udolpho, gentlemen? Isn’t this supposition really too fantastic and
too romantic? And observe, if that supposition breaks down, the whole
charge of robbery is scattered to the winds, for in that case what
could have become of the other fifteen hundred roubles? By what miracle
could they have disappeared, since it’s proved the prisoner went
nowhere else? And we are ready to ruin a man’s life with such tales!

“I shall be told that he could not explain where he got the fifteen
hundred that he had, and every one knew that he was without money
before that night. Who knew it, pray? The prisoner has made a clear and
unflinching statement of the source of that money, and if you will have
it so, gentlemen of the jury, nothing can be more probable than that
statement, and more consistent with the temper and spirit of the
prisoner. The prosecutor is charmed with his own romance. A man of weak
will, who had brought himself to take the three thousand so insultingly
offered by his betrothed, could not, we are told, have set aside half
and sewn it up, but would, even if he had done so, have unpicked it
every two days and taken out a hundred, and so would have spent it all
in a month. All this, you will remember, was put forward in a tone that
brooked no contradiction. But what if the thing happened quite
differently? What if you’ve been weaving a romance, and about quite a
different kind of man? That’s just it, you have invented quite a
different man!

“I shall be told, perhaps, there are witnesses that he spent on one day
all that three thousand given him by his betrothed a month before the
catastrophe, so he could not have divided the sum in half. But who are
these witnesses? The value of their evidence has been shown in court
already. Besides, in another man’s hand a crust always seems larger,
and no one of these witnesses counted that money; they all judged
simply at sight. And the witness Maximov has testified that the
prisoner had twenty thousand in his hand. You see, gentlemen of the
jury, psychology is a two-edged weapon. Let me turn the other edge now
and see what comes of it.

“A month before the catastrophe the prisoner was entrusted by Katerina
Ivanovna with three thousand roubles to send off by post. But the
question is: is it true that they were entrusted to him in such an
insulting and degrading way as was proclaimed just now? The first
statement made by the young lady on the subject was different,
perfectly different. In the second statement we heard only cries of
resentment and revenge, cries of long-concealed hatred. And the very
fact that the witness gave her first evidence incorrectly, gives us a
right to conclude that her second piece of evidence may have been
incorrect also. The prosecutor will not, dare not (his own words) touch
on that story. So be it. I will not touch on it either, but will only
venture to observe that if a lofty and high-principled person, such as
that highly respected young lady unquestionably is, if such a person, I
say, allows herself suddenly in court to contradict her first
statement, with the obvious motive of ruining the prisoner, it is clear
that this evidence has been given not impartially, not coolly. Have not
we the right to assume that a revengeful woman might have exaggerated
much? Yes, she may well have exaggerated, in particular, the insult and
humiliation of her offering him the money. No, it was offered in such a
way that it was possible to take it, especially for a man so easy-going
as the prisoner, above all, as he expected to receive shortly from his
father the three thousand roubles that he reckoned was owing to him. It
was unreflecting of him, but it was just his irresponsible want of
reflection that made him so confident that his father would give him
the money, that he would get it, and so could always dispatch the money
entrusted to him and repay the debt.

“But the prosecutor refuses to allow that he could the same day have
set aside half the money and sewn it up in a little bag. That’s not his
character, he tells us, he couldn’t have had such feelings. But yet he
talked himself of the broad Karamazov nature; he cried out about the
two extremes which a Karamazov can contemplate at once. Karamazov is
just such a two-sided nature, fluctuating between two extremes, that
even when moved by the most violent craving for riotous gayety, he can
pull himself up, if something strikes him on the other side. And on the
other side is love—that new love which had flamed up in his heart, and
for that love he needed money; oh, far more than for carousing with his
mistress. If she were to say to him, ‘I am yours, I won’t have Fyodor
Pavlovitch,’ then he must have money to take her away. That was more
important than carousing. Could a Karamazov fail to understand it? That
anxiety was just what he was suffering from—what is there improbable in
his laying aside that money and concealing it in case of emergency?

“But time passed, and Fyodor Pavlovitch did not give the prisoner the
expected three thousand; on the contrary, the latter heard that he
meant to use this sum to seduce the woman he, the prisoner, loved. ‘If
Fyodor Pavlovitch doesn’t give the money,’ he thought, ‘I shall be put
in the position of a thief before Katerina Ivanovna.’ And then the idea
presented itself to him that he would go to Katerina Ivanovna, lay
before her the fifteen hundred roubles he still carried round his neck,
and say, ‘I am a scoundrel, but not a thief.’ So here we have already a
twofold reason why he should guard that sum of money as the apple of
his eye, why he shouldn’t unpick the little bag, and spend it a hundred
at a time. Why should you deny the prisoner a sense of honor? Yes, he
has a sense of honor, granted that it’s misplaced, granted it’s often
mistaken, yet it exists and amounts to a passion, and he has proved
that.

“But now the affair becomes even more complex; his jealous torments
reach a climax, and those same two questions torture his fevered brain
more and more: ‘If I repay Katerina Ivanovna, where can I find the
means to go off with Grushenka?’ If he behaved wildly, drank, and made
disturbances in the taverns in the course of that month, it was perhaps
because he was wretched and strained beyond his powers of endurance.
These two questions became so acute that they drove him at last to
despair. He sent his younger brother to beg for the last time for the
three thousand roubles, but without waiting for a reply, burst in
himself and ended by beating the old man in the presence of witnesses.
After that he had no prospect of getting it from any one; his father
would not give it him after that beating.

“The same evening he struck himself on the breast, just on the upper
part of the breast where the little bag was, and swore to his brother
that he had the means of not being a scoundrel, but that still he would
remain a scoundrel, for he foresaw that he would not use that means,
that he wouldn’t have the character, that he wouldn’t have the
will-power to do it. Why, why does the prosecutor refuse to believe the
evidence of Alexey Karamazov, given so genuinely and sincerely, so
spontaneously and convincingly? And why, on the contrary, does he force
me to believe in money hidden in a crevice, in the dungeons of the
castle of Udolpho?

“The same evening, after his talk with his brother, the prisoner wrote
that fatal letter, and that letter is the chief, the most stupendous
proof of the prisoner having committed robbery! ‘I shall beg from every
one, and if I don’t get it I shall murder my father and shall take the
envelope with the pink ribbon on it from under his mattress as soon as
Ivan has gone.’ A full program of the murder, we are told, so it must
have been he. ‘It has all been done as he wrote,’ cries the prosecutor.

“But in the first place, it’s the letter of a drunken man and written
in great irritation; secondly, he writes of the envelope from what he
has heard from Smerdyakov again, for he has not seen the envelope
himself; and thirdly, he wrote it indeed, but how can you prove that he
did it? Did the prisoner take the envelope from under the pillow, did
he find the money, did that money exist indeed? And was it to get money
that the prisoner ran off, if you remember? He ran off post-haste not
to steal, but to find out where she was, the woman who had crushed him.
He was not running to carry out a program, to carry out what he had
written, that is, not for an act of premeditated robbery, but he ran
suddenly, spontaneously, in a jealous fury. Yes! I shall be told, but
when he got there and murdered him he seized the money, too. But did he
murder him after all? The charge of robbery I repudiate with
indignation. A man cannot be accused of robbery, if it’s impossible to
state accurately what he has stolen; that’s an axiom. But did he murder
him without robbery, did he murder him at all? Is that proved? Isn’t
that, too, a romance?”




Chapter XII.
And There Was No Murder Either


“Allow me, gentlemen of the jury, to remind you that a man’s life is at
stake and that you must be careful. We have heard the prosecutor
himself admit that until to-day he hesitated to accuse the prisoner of
a full and conscious premeditation of the crime; he hesitated till he
saw that fatal drunken letter which was produced in court to-day. ‘All
was done as written.’ But, I repeat again, he was running to her, to
seek her, solely to find out where she was. That’s a fact that can’t be
disputed. Had she been at home, he would not have run away, but would
have remained at her side, and so would not have done what he promised
in the letter. He ran unexpectedly and accidentally, and by that time
very likely he did not even remember his drunken letter. ‘He snatched
up the pestle,’ they say, and you will remember how a whole edifice of
psychology was built on that pestle—why he was bound to look at that
pestle as a weapon, to snatch it up, and so on, and so on. A very
commonplace idea occurs to me at this point: What if that pestle had
not been in sight, had not been lying on the shelf from which it was
snatched by the prisoner, but had been put away in a cupboard? It would
not have caught the prisoner’s eye, and he would have run away without
a weapon, with empty hands, and then he would certainly not have killed
any one. How then can I look upon the pestle as a proof of
premeditation?

“Yes, but he talked in the taverns of murdering his father, and two
days before, on the evening when he wrote his drunken letter, he was
quiet and only quarreled with a shopman in the tavern, because a
Karamazov could not help quarreling, forsooth! But my answer to that
is, that, if he was planning such a murder in accordance with his
letter, he certainly would not have quarreled even with a shopman, and
probably would not have gone into the tavern at all, because a person
plotting such a crime seeks quiet and retirement, seeks to efface
himself, to avoid being seen and heard, and that not from calculation,
but from instinct. Gentlemen of the jury, the psychological method is a
two-edged weapon, and we, too, can use it. As for all this shouting in
taverns throughout the month, don’t we often hear children, or
drunkards coming out of taverns shout, ‘I’ll kill you’? but they don’t
murder any one. And that fatal letter—isn’t that simply drunken
irritability, too? Isn’t that simply the shout of the brawler outside
the tavern, ‘I’ll kill you! I’ll kill the lot of you!’ Why not, why
could it not be that? What reason have we to call that letter ‘fatal’
rather than absurd? Because his father has been found murdered, because
a witness saw the prisoner running out of the garden with a weapon in
his hand, and was knocked down by him: therefore, we are told,
everything was done as he had planned in writing, and the letter was
not ‘absurd,’ but ‘fatal.’

“Now, thank God! we’ve come to the real point: ‘since he was in the
garden, he must have murdered him.’ In those few words: ‘since he
_was_, then he _must_’ lies the whole case for the prosecution. He was
there, so he must have. And what if there is no _must_ about it, even
if he was there? Oh, I admit that the chain of evidence—the
coincidences—are really suggestive. But examine all these facts
separately, regardless of their connection. Why, for instance, does the
prosecution refuse to admit the truth of the prisoner’s statement that
he ran away from his father’s window? Remember the sarcasms in which
the prosecutor indulged at the expense of the respectful and ‘pious’
sentiments which suddenly came over the murderer. But what if there
were something of the sort, a feeling of religious awe, if not of
filial respect? ‘My mother must have been praying for me at that
moment,’ were the prisoner’s words at the preliminary inquiry, and so
he ran away as soon as he convinced himself that Madame Svyetlov was
not in his father’s house. ‘But he could not convince himself by
looking through the window,’ the prosecutor objects. But why couldn’t
he? Why? The window opened at the signals given by the prisoner. Some
word might have been uttered by Fyodor Pavlovitch, some exclamation
which showed the prisoner that she was not there. Why should we assume
everything as we imagine it, as we make up our minds to imagine it? A
thousand things may happen in reality which elude the subtlest
imagination.

“‘Yes, but Grigory saw the door open and so the prisoner certainly was
in the house, therefore he killed him.’ Now about that door, gentlemen
of the jury.... Observe that we have only the statement of one witness
as to that door, and he was at the time in such a condition, that— But
supposing the door was open; supposing the prisoner has lied in denying
it, from an instinct of self-defense, natural in his position;
supposing he did go into the house—well, what then? How does it follow
that because he was there he committed the murder? He might have dashed
in, run through the rooms; might have pushed his father away; might
have struck him; but as soon as he had made sure Madame Svyetlov was
not there, he may have run away rejoicing that she was not there and
that he had not killed his father. And it was perhaps just because he
had escaped from the temptation to kill his father, because he had a
clear conscience and was rejoicing at not having killed him, that he
was capable of a pure feeling, the feeling of pity and compassion, and
leapt off the fence a minute later to the assistance of Grigory after
he had, in his excitement, knocked him down.

“With terrible eloquence the prosecutor has described to us the
dreadful state of the prisoner’s mind at Mokroe when love again lay
before him calling him to new life, while love was impossible for him
because he had his father’s bloodstained corpse behind him and beyond
that corpse—retribution. And yet the prosecutor allowed him love, which
he explained, according to his method,