 von Moor! Judge and save us! We need not only your
prayers but your prophecies!”

“Speak without buffoonery, and don’t begin by insulting the members of
your family,” answered the elder, in a faint, exhausted voice. He was
obviously getting more and more fatigued, and his strength was failing.

“An unseemly farce which I foresaw when I came here!” cried Dmitri
indignantly. He too leapt up. “Forgive it, reverend Father,” he added,
addressing the elder. “I am not a cultivated man, and I don’t even know
how to address you properly, but you have been deceived and you have
been too good-natured in letting us meet here. All my father wants is a
scandal. Why he wants it only he can tell. He always has some motive.
But I believe I know why—”

“They all blame me, all of them!” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch in his turn.
“Pyotr Alexandrovitch here blames me too. You have been blaming me,
Pyotr Alexandrovitch, you have!” he turned suddenly to Miüsov, although
the latter was not dreaming of interrupting him. “They all accuse me of
having hidden the children’s money in my boots, and cheated them, but
isn’t there a court of law? There they will reckon out for you, Dmitri
Fyodorovitch, from your notes, your letters, and your agreements, how
much money you had, how much you have spent, and how much you have
left. Why does Pyotr Alexandrovitch refuse to pass judgment? Dmitri is
not a stranger to him. Because they are all against me, while Dmitri
Fyodorovitch is in debt to me, and not a little, but some thousands of
which I have documentary proof. The whole town is echoing with his
debaucheries. And where he was stationed before, he several times spent
a thousand or two for the seduction of some respectable girl; we know
all about that, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, in its most secret details. I’ll
prove it.... Would you believe it, holy Father, he has captivated the
heart of the most honorable of young ladies of good family and fortune,
daughter of a gallant colonel, formerly his superior officer, who had
received many honors and had the Anna Order on his breast. He
compromised the girl by his promise of marriage, now she is an orphan
and here; she is betrothed to him, yet before her very eyes he is
dancing attendance on a certain enchantress. And although this
enchantress has lived in, so to speak, civil marriage with a
respectable man, yet she is of an independent character, an
unapproachable fortress for everybody, just like a legal wife—for she
is virtuous, yes, holy Fathers, she is virtuous. Dmitri Fyodorovitch
wants to open this fortress with a golden key, and that’s why he is
insolent to me now, trying to get money from me, though he has wasted
thousands on this enchantress already. He’s continually borrowing money
for the purpose. From whom do you think? Shall I say, Mitya?”

“Be silent!” cried Dmitri, “wait till I’m gone. Don’t dare in my
presence to asperse the good name of an honorable girl! That you should
utter a word about her is an outrage, and I won’t permit it!”

He was breathless.

“Mitya! Mitya!” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch hysterically, squeezing out a
tear. “And is your father’s blessing nothing to you? If I curse you,
what then?”

“Shameless hypocrite!” exclaimed Dmitri furiously.

“He says that to his father! his father! What would he be with others?
Gentlemen, only fancy; there’s a poor but honorable man living here,
burdened with a numerous family, a captain who got into trouble and was
discharged from the army, but not publicly, not by court-martial, with
no slur on his honor. And three weeks ago, Dmitri seized him by the
beard in a tavern, dragged him out into the street and beat him
publicly, and all because he is an agent in a little business of mine.”

“It’s all a lie! Outwardly it’s the truth, but inwardly a lie!” Dmitri
was trembling with rage. “Father, I don’t justify my action. Yes, I
confess it publicly, I behaved like a brute to that captain, and I
regret it now, and I’m disgusted with myself for my brutal rage. But
this captain, this agent of yours, went to that lady whom you call an
enchantress, and suggested to her from you, that she should take
I.O.U.’s of mine which were in your possession, and should sue me for
the money so as to get me into prison by means of them, if I persisted
in claiming an account from you of my property. Now you reproach me for
having a weakness for that lady when you yourself incited her to
captivate me! She told me so to my face.... She told me the story and
laughed at you.... You wanted to put me in prison because you are
jealous of me with her, because you’d begun to force your attentions
upon her; and I know all about that, too; she laughed at you for that
as well—you hear—she laughed at you as she described it. So here you
have this man, this father who reproaches his profligate son!
Gentlemen, forgive my anger, but I foresaw that this crafty old man
would only bring you together to create a scandal. I had come to
forgive him if he held out his hand; to forgive him, and ask
forgiveness! But as he has just this minute insulted not only me, but
an honorable young lady, for whom I feel such reverence that I dare not
take her name in vain, I have made up my mind to show up his game,
though he is my father....”

He could not go on. His eyes were glittering and he breathed with
difficulty. But every one in the cell was stirred. All except Father
Zossima got up from their seats uneasily. The monks looked austere but
waited for guidance from the elder. He sat still, pale, not from
excitement but from the weakness of disease. An imploring smile lighted
up his face; from time to time he raised his hand, as though to check
the storm, and, of course, a gesture from him would have been enough to
end the scene; but he seemed to be waiting for something and watched
them intently as though trying to make out something which was not
perfectly clear to him. At last Miüsov felt completely humiliated and
disgraced.

“We are all to blame for this scandalous scene,” he said hotly. “But I
did not foresee it when I came, though I knew with whom I had to deal.
This must be stopped at once! Believe me, your reverence, I had no
precise knowledge of the details that have just come to light, I was
unwilling to believe them, and I learn for the first time.... A father
is jealous of his son’s relations with a woman of loose behavior and
intrigues with the creature to get his son into prison! This is the
company in which I have been forced to be present! I was deceived. I
declare to you all that I was as much deceived as any one.”

“Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” yelled Fyodor Pavlovitch suddenly, in an
unnatural voice, “if you were not my son I would challenge you this
instant to a duel ... with pistols, at three paces ... across a
handkerchief,” he ended, stamping with both feet.

With old liars who have been acting all their lives there are moments
when they enter so completely into their part that they tremble or shed
tears of emotion in earnest, although at that very moment, or a second
later, they are able to whisper to themselves, “You know you are lying,
you shameless old sinner! You’re acting now, in spite of your ‘holy’
wrath.”

Dmitri frowned painfully, and looked with unutterable contempt at his
father.

“I thought ... I thought,” he said, in a soft and, as it were,
controlled voice, “that I was coming to my native place with the angel
of my heart, my betrothed, to cherish his old age, and I find nothing
but a depraved profligate, a despicable clown!”

“A duel!” yelled the old wretch again, breathless and spluttering at
each syllable. “And you, Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov, let me tell you
that there has never been in all your family a loftier, and more
honest—you hear—more honest woman than this ‘creature,’ as you have
dared to call her! And you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, have abandoned your
betrothed for that ‘creature,’ so you must yourself have thought that
your betrothed couldn’t hold a candle to her. That’s the woman called a
‘creature’!”

“Shameful!” broke from Father Iosif.

“Shameful and disgraceful!” Kalganov, flushing crimson, cried in a
boyish voice, trembling with emotion. He had been silent till that
moment.

“Why is such a man alive?” Dmitri, beside himself with rage, growled in
a hollow voice, hunching up his shoulders till he looked almost
deformed. “Tell me, can he be allowed to go on defiling the earth?” He
looked round at every one and pointed at the old man. He spoke evenly
and deliberately.

“Listen, listen, monks, to the parricide!” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch,
rushing up to Father Iosif. “That’s the answer to your ‘shameful!’ What
is shameful? That ‘creature,’ that ‘woman of loose behavior’ is perhaps
holier than you are yourselves, you monks who are seeking salvation!
She fell perhaps in her youth, ruined by her environment. But she loved
much, and Christ himself forgave the woman ‘who loved much.’”

“It was not for such love Christ forgave her,” broke impatiently from
the gentle Father Iosif.

“Yes, it was for such, monks, it was! You save your souls here, eating
cabbage, and think you are the righteous. You eat a gudgeon a day, and
you think you bribe God with gudgeon.”

“This is unendurable!” was heard on all sides in the cell.

But this unseemly scene was cut short in a most unexpected way. Father
Zossima rose suddenly from his seat. Almost distracted with anxiety for
the elder and every one else, Alyosha succeeded, however, in supporting
him by the arm. Father Zossima moved towards Dmitri and reaching him
sank on his knees before him. Alyosha thought that he had fallen from
weakness, but this was not so. The elder distinctly and deliberately
bowed down at Dmitri’s feet till his forehead touched the floor.
Alyosha was so astounded that he failed to assist him when he got up
again. There was a faint smile on his lips.

“Good-by! Forgive me, all of you!” he said, bowing on all sides to his
guests.

Dmitri stood for a few moments in amazement. Bowing down to him—what
did it mean? Suddenly he cried aloud, “Oh, God!” hid his face in his
hands, and rushed out of the room. All the guests flocked out after
him, in their confusion not saying good-by, or bowing to their host.
Only the monks went up to him again for a blessing.

“What did it mean, falling at his feet like that? Was it symbolic or
what?” said Fyodor Pavlovitch, suddenly quieted and trying to reopen
conversation without venturing to address anybody in particular. They
were all passing out of the precincts of the hermitage at the moment.

“I can’t answer for a madhouse and for madmen,” Miüsov answered at once
ill-humoredly, “but I will spare myself your company, Fyodor
Pavlovitch, and, trust me, for ever. Where’s that monk?”

“That monk,” that is, the monk who had invited them to dine with the
Superior, did not keep them waiting. He met them as soon as they came
down the steps from the elder’s cell, as though he had been waiting for
them all the time.

“Reverend Father, kindly do me a favor. Convey my deepest respect to
the Father Superior, apologize for me, personally, Miüsov, to his
reverence, telling him that I deeply regret that owing to unforeseen
circumstances I am unable to have the honor of being present at his
table, greatly as I should desire to do so,” Miüsov said irritably to
the monk.

“And that unforeseen circumstance, of course, is myself,” Fyodor
Pavlovitch cut in immediately. “Do you hear, Father; this gentleman
doesn’t want to remain in my company or else he’d come at once. And you
shall go, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, pray go to the Father Superior and good
appetite to you. I will decline, and not you. Home, home, I’ll eat at
home, I don’t feel equal to it here, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, my amiable
relative.”

“I am not your relative and never have been, you contemptible man!”

“I said it on purpose to madden you, because you always disclaim the
relationship, though you really are a relation in spite of your
shuffling. I’ll prove it by the church calendar. As for you, Ivan, stay
if you like. I’ll send the horses for you later. Propriety requires you
to go to the Father Superior, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, to apologize for
the disturbance we’ve been making....”

“Is it true that you are going home? Aren’t you lying?”

“Pyotr Alexandrovitch! How could I dare after what’s happened! Forgive
me, gentlemen, I was carried away! And upset besides! And, indeed, I am
ashamed. Gentlemen, one man has the heart of Alexander of Macedon and
another the heart of the little dog Fido. Mine is that of the little
dog Fido. I am ashamed! After such an escapade how can I go to dinner,
to gobble up the monastery’s sauces? I am ashamed, I can’t. You must
excuse me!”

“The devil only knows, what if he deceives us?” thought Miüsov, still
hesitating, and watching the retreating buffoon with distrustful eyes.
The latter turned round, and noticing that Miüsov was watching him,
waved him a kiss.

“Well, are you coming to the Superior?” Miüsov asked Ivan abruptly.

“Why not? I was especially invited yesterday.”

“Unfortunately I feel myself compelled to go to this confounded
dinner,” said Miüsov with the same irritability, regardless of the fact
that the monk was listening. “We ought, at least, to apologize for the
disturbance, and explain that it was not our doing. What do you think?”

“Yes, we must explain that it wasn’t our doing. Besides, father won’t
be there,” observed Ivan.

“Well, I should hope not! Confound this dinner!”

They all walked on, however. The monk listened in silence. On the road
through the copse he made one observation however—that the Father
Superior had been waiting a long time, and that they were more than
half an hour late. He received no answer. Miüsov looked with hatred at
Ivan.

“Here he is, going to the dinner as though nothing had happened,” he
thought. “A brazen face, and the conscience of a Karamazov!”




Chapter VII.
A Young Man Bent On A Career


Alyosha helped Father Zossima to his bedroom and seated him on his bed.
It was a little room furnished with the bare necessities. There was a
narrow iron bedstead, with a strip of felt for a mattress. In the
corner, under the ikons, was a reading-desk with a cross and the Gospel
lying on it. The elder sank exhausted on the bed. His eyes glittered
and he breathed hard. He looked intently at Alyosha, as though
considering something.

“Go, my dear boy, go. Porfiry is enough for me. Make haste, you are
needed there, go and wait at the Father Superior’s table.”

“Let me stay here,” Alyosha entreated.

“You are more needed there. There is no peace there. You will wait, and
be of service. If evil spirits rise up, repeat a prayer. And remember,
my son”—the elder liked to call him that—“this is not the place for you
in the future. When it is God’s will to call me, leave the monastery.
Go away for good.”

Alyosha started.

“What is it? This is not your place for the time. I bless you for great
service in the world. Yours will be a long pilgrimage. And you will
have to take a wife, too. You will have to bear _all_ before you come
back. There will be much to do. But I don’t doubt of you, and so I send
you forth. Christ is with you. Do not abandon Him and He will not
abandon you. You will see great sorrow, and in that sorrow you will be
happy. This is my last message to you: in sorrow seek happiness. Work,
work unceasingly. Remember my words, for although I shall talk with you
again, not only my days but my hours are numbered.”

Alyosha’s face again betrayed strong emotion. The corners of his mouth
quivered.

“What is it again?” Father Zossima asked, smiling gently. “The worldly
may follow the dead with tears, but here we rejoice over the father who
is departing. We rejoice and pray for him. Leave me, I must pray. Go,
and make haste. Be near your brothers. And not near one only, but near
both.”

Father Zossima raised his hand to bless him. Alyosha could make no
protest, though he had a great longing to remain. He longed, moreover,
to ask the significance of his bowing to Dmitri, the question was on
the tip of his tongue, but he dared not ask it. He knew that the elder
would have explained it unasked if he had thought fit. But evidently it
was not his will. That action had made a terrible impression on
Alyosha; he believed blindly in its mysterious significance.
Mysterious, and perhaps awful.

As he hastened out of the hermitage precincts to reach the monastery in
time to serve at the Father Superior’s dinner, he felt a sudden pang at
his heart, and stopped short. He seemed to hear again Father Zossima’s
words, foretelling his approaching end. What he had foretold so exactly
must infallibly come to pass. Alyosha believed that implicitly. But how
could he be left without him? How could he live without seeing and
hearing him? Where should he go? He had told him not to weep, and to
leave the