 you think I meant to make you blush?” said Katerina Ivanovna,
somewhat surprised. “Ah, my dear, how little you understand me!”

“Yes, and you too perhaps quite misunderstand me, dear young lady.
Maybe I’m not so good as I seem to you. I’ve a bad heart; I will have
my own way. I fascinated poor Dmitri Fyodorovitch that day simply for
fun.”

“But now you’ll save him. You’ve given me your word. You’ll explain it
all to him. You’ll break to him that you have long loved another man,
who is now offering you his hand.”

“Oh, no! I didn’t give you my word to do that. It was you kept talking
about that. I didn’t give you my word.”

“Then I didn’t quite understand you,” said Katerina Ivanovna slowly,
turning a little pale. “You promised—”

“Oh, no, angel lady, I’ve promised nothing,” Grushenka interrupted
softly and evenly, still with the same gay and simple expression. “You
see at once, dear young lady, what a willful wretch I am compared with
you. If I want to do a thing I do it. I may have made you some promise
just now. But now again I’m thinking: I may take to Mitya again. I
liked him very much once—liked him for almost a whole hour. Now maybe I
shall go and tell him to stay with me from this day forward. You see,
I’m so changeable.”

“Just now you said—something quite different,” Katerina Ivanovna
whispered faintly.

“Ah, just now! But, you know. I’m such a soft-hearted, silly creature.
Only think what he’s gone through on my account! What if when I go home
I feel sorry for him? What then?”

“I never expected—”

“Ah, young lady, how good and generous you are compared with me! Now
perhaps you won’t care for a silly creature like me, now you know my
character. Give me your sweet little hand, angelic lady,” she said
tenderly, and with a sort of reverence took Katerina Ivanovna’s hand.

“Here, dear young lady, I’ll take your hand and kiss it as you did
mine. You kissed mine three times, but I ought to kiss yours three
hundred times to be even with you. Well, but let that pass. And then it
shall be as God wills. Perhaps I shall be your slave entirely and want
to do your bidding like a slave. Let it be as God wills, without any
agreements and promises. What a sweet hand—what a sweet hand you have!
You sweet young lady, you incredible beauty!”

She slowly raised the hands to her lips, with the strange object indeed
of “being even” with her in kisses.

Katerina Ivanovna did not take her hand away. She listened with timid
hope to the last words, though Grushenka’s promise to do her bidding
like a slave was very strangely expressed. She looked intently into her
eyes; she still saw in those eyes the same simple-hearted, confiding
expression, the same bright gayety.

“She’s perhaps too naïve,” thought Katerina Ivanovna, with a gleam of
hope.

Grushenka meanwhile seemed enthusiastic over the “sweet hand.” She
raised it deliberately to her lips. But she held it for two or three
minutes near her lips, as though reconsidering something.

“Do you know, angel lady,” she suddenly drawled in an even more soft
and sugary voice, “do you know, after all, I think I won’t kiss your
hand?” And she laughed a little merry laugh.

“As you please. What’s the matter with you?” said Katerina Ivanovna,
starting suddenly.

“So that you may be left to remember that you kissed my hand, but I
didn’t kiss yours.”

There was a sudden gleam in her eyes. She looked with awful intentness
at Katerina Ivanovna.

“Insolent creature!” cried Katerina Ivanovna, as though suddenly
grasping something. She flushed all over and leapt up from her seat.

Grushenka too got up, but without haste.

“So I shall tell Mitya how you kissed my hand, but I didn’t kiss yours
at all. And how he will laugh!”

“Vile slut! Go away!”

“Ah, for shame, young lady! Ah, for shame! That’s unbecoming for you,
dear young lady, a word like that.”

“Go away! You’re a creature for sale!” screamed Katerina Ivanovna.
Every feature was working in her utterly distorted face.

“For sale indeed! You used to visit gentlemen in the dusk for money
once; you brought your beauty for sale. You see, I know.”

Katerina Ivanovna shrieked, and would have rushed at her, but Alyosha
held her with all his strength.

“Not a step, not a word! Don’t speak, don’t answer her. She’ll go
away—she’ll go at once.”

At that instant Katerina Ivanovna’s two aunts ran in at her cry, and
with them a maid-servant. All hurried to her.

“I will go away,” said Grushenka, taking up her mantle from the sofa.
“Alyosha, darling, see me home!”

“Go away—go away, make haste!” cried Alyosha, clasping his hands
imploringly.

“Dear little Alyosha, see me home! I’ve got a pretty little story to
tell you on the way. I got up this scene for your benefit, Alyosha. See
me home, dear, you’ll be glad of it afterwards.”

Alyosha turned away, wringing his hands. Grushenka ran out of the
house, laughing musically.

Katerina Ivanovna went into a fit of hysterics. She sobbed, and was
shaken with convulsions. Every one fussed round her.

“I warned you,” said the elder of her aunts. “I tried to prevent your
doing this. You’re too impulsive. How could you do such a thing? You
don’t know these creatures, and they say she’s worse than any of them.
You are too self-willed.”

“She’s a tigress!” yelled Katerina Ivanovna. “Why did you hold me,
Alexey Fyodorovitch? I’d have beaten her—beaten her!”

She could not control herself before Alyosha; perhaps she did not care
to, indeed.

“She ought to be flogged in public on a scaffold!”

Alyosha withdrew towards the door.

“But, my God!” cried Katerina Ivanovna, clasping her hands. “He! He! He
could be so dishonorable, so inhuman! Why, he told that creature what
happened on that fatal, accursed day! ‘You brought your beauty for
sale, dear young lady.’ She knows it! Your brother’s a scoundrel,
Alexey Fyodorovitch.”

Alyosha wanted to say something, but he couldn’t find a word. His heart
ached.

“Go away, Alexey Fyodorovitch! It’s shameful, it’s awful for me! 
To-morrow, I beg you on my knees, come to-morrow. Don’t condemn me.
Forgive me. I don’t know what I shall do with myself now!”

Alyosha walked out into the street reeling. He could have wept as she
did. Suddenly he was overtaken by the maid.

“The young lady forgot to give you this letter from Madame Hohlakov;
it’s been left with us since dinner-time.”

Alyosha took the little pink envelope mechanically and put it, almost
unconsciously, into his pocket.




Chapter XI.
Another Reputation Ruined


It was not much more than three-quarters of a mile from the town to the
monastery. Alyosha walked quickly along the road, at that hour
deserted. It was almost night, and too dark to see anything clearly at
thirty paces ahead. There were cross-roads half-way. A figure came into
sight under a solitary willow at the cross-roads. As soon as Alyosha
reached the cross-roads the figure moved out and rushed at him,
shouting savagely:

“Your money or your life!”

“So it’s you, Mitya,” cried Alyosha, in surprise, violently startled
however.

“Ha ha ha! You didn’t expect me? I wondered where to wait for you. By
her house? There are three ways from it, and I might have missed you.
At last I thought of waiting here, for you had to pass here, there’s no
other way to the monastery. Come, tell me the truth. Crush me like a
beetle. But what’s the matter?”

“Nothing, brother—it’s the fright you gave me. Oh, Dmitri! Father’s
blood just now.” (Alyosha began to cry, he had been on the verge of
tears for a long time, and now something seemed to snap in his soul.)
“You almost killed him—cursed him—and now—here—you’re making
jokes—‘Your money or your life!’”

“Well, what of that? It’s not seemly—is that it? Not suitable in my
position?”

“No—I only—”

“Stay. Look at the night. You see what a dark night, what clouds, what
a wind has risen. I hid here under the willow waiting for you. And as
God’s above, I suddenly thought, why go on in misery any longer, what
is there to wait for? Here I have a willow, a handkerchief, a shirt, I
can twist them into a rope in a minute, and braces besides, and why go
on burdening the earth, dishonoring it with my vile presence? And then
I heard you coming—Heavens, it was as though something flew down to me
suddenly. So there is a man, then, whom I love. Here he is, that man,
my dear little brother, whom I love more than any one in the world, the
only one I love in the world. And I loved you so much, so much at that
moment that I thought, ‘I’ll fall on his neck at once.’ Then a stupid
idea struck me, to have a joke with you and scare you. I shouted, like
a fool, ‘Your money!’ Forgive my foolery—it was only nonsense, and
there’s nothing unseemly in my soul.... Damn it all, tell me what’s
happened. What did she say? Strike me, crush me, don’t spare me! Was
she furious?”

“No, not that.... There was nothing like that, Mitya. There—I found
them both there.”

“Both? Whom?”

“Grushenka at Katerina Ivanovna’s.”

Dmitri was struck dumb.

“Impossible!” he cried. “You’re raving! Grushenka with her?”

Alyosha described all that had happened from the moment he went in to
Katerina Ivanovna’s. He was ten minutes telling his story. He can’t be
said to have told it fluently and consecutively, but he seemed to make
it clear, not omitting any word or action of significance, and vividly
describing, often in one word, his own sensations. Dmitri listened in
silence, gazing at him with a terrible fixed stare, but it was clear to
Alyosha that he understood it all, and had grasped every point. But as
the story went on, his face became not merely gloomy, but menacing. He
scowled, he clenched his teeth, and his fixed stare became still more
rigid, more concentrated, more terrible, when suddenly, with incredible
rapidity, his wrathful, savage face changed, his tightly compressed
lips parted, and Dmitri Fyodorovitch broke into uncontrolled,
spontaneous laughter. He literally shook with laughter. For a long time
he could not speak.

“So she wouldn’t kiss her hand! So she didn’t kiss it; so she ran
away!” he kept exclaiming with hysterical delight; insolent delight it
might have been called, if it had not been so spontaneous. “So the
other one called her tigress! And a tigress she is! So she ought to be
flogged on a scaffold? Yes, yes, so she ought. That’s just what I
think; she ought to have been long ago. It’s like this, brother, let
her be punished, but I must get better first. I understand the queen of
impudence. That’s her all over! You saw her all over in that
hand-kissing, the she-devil! She’s magnificent in her own line! So she
ran home? I’ll go—ah—I’ll run to her! Alyosha, don’t blame me, I agree
that hanging is too good for her.”

“But Katerina Ivanovna!” exclaimed Alyosha sorrowfully.

“I see her, too! I see right through her, as I’ve never done before!
It’s a regular discovery of the four continents of the world, that is,
of the five! What a thing to do! That’s just like Katya, who was not
afraid to face a coarse, unmannerly officer and risk a deadly insult on
a generous impulse to save her father! But the pride, the recklessness,
the defiance of fate, the unbounded defiance! You say that aunt tried
to stop her? That aunt, you know, is overbearing, herself. She’s the
sister of the general’s widow in Moscow, and even more stuck-up than
she. But her husband was caught stealing government money. He lost
everything, his estate and all, and the proud wife had to lower her
colors, and hasn’t raised them since. So she tried to prevent Katya,
but she wouldn’t listen to her! She thinks she can overcome everything,
that everything will give way to her. She thought she could bewitch
Grushenka if she liked, and she believed it herself: she plays a part
to herself, and whose fault is it? Do you think she kissed Grushenka’s
hand first, on purpose, with a motive? No, she really was fascinated by
Grushenka, that’s to say, not by Grushenka, but by her own dream, her
own delusion—because it was _her_ dream, _her_ delusion! Alyosha,
darling, how did you escape from them, those women? Did you pick up
your cassock and run? Ha ha ha!”

“Brother, you don’t seem to have noticed how you’ve insulted Katerina
Ivanovna by telling Grushenka about that day. And she flung it in her
face just now that she had gone to gentlemen in secret to sell her
beauty! Brother, what could be worse than that insult?”

What worried Alyosha more than anything was that, incredible as it
seemed, his brother appeared pleased at Katerina Ivanovna’s
humiliation.

“Bah!” Dmitri frowned fiercely, and struck his forehead with his hand.
He only now realized it, though Alyosha had just told him of the
insult, and Katerina Ivanovna’s cry: “Your brother is a scoundrel!”

“Yes, perhaps, I really did tell Grushenka about that ‘fatal day,’ as
Katya calls it. Yes, I did tell her, I remember! It was that time at
Mokroe. I was drunk, the gypsies were singing.... But I was sobbing. I
was sobbing then, kneeling and praying to Katya’s image, and Grushenka
understood it. She understood it all then. I remember, she cried
herself.... Damn it all! But it’s bound to be so now.... Then she
cried, but now ‘the dagger in the heart’! That’s how women are.”

He looked down and sank into thought.

“Yes, I am a scoundrel, a thorough scoundrel!” he said suddenly, in a
gloomy voice. “It doesn’t matter whether I cried or not, I’m a
scoundrel! Tell her I accept the name, if that’s any comfort. Come,
that’s enough. Good-by. It’s no use talking! It’s not amusing. You go
your way and I mine. And I don’t want to see you again except as a last
resource. Good-by, Alexey!”

He warmly pressed Alyosha’s hand, and still looking down, without
raising his head, as though tearing himself away, turned rapidly
towards the town.

Alyosha looked after him, unable to believe he would go away so
abruptly.

“Stay, Alexey, one more confession to you alone!” cried Dmitri,
suddenly turning back. “Look at me. Look at me well. You see here,
here—there’s terrible disgrace in store for me.” (As he said “here,”
Dmitri struck his chest with his fist with a strange air, as though the
dishonor lay precisely on his chest, in some spot, in a pocket,
perhaps, or hanging round his neck.) “You know me now, a scoundrel, an
avowed scoundrel, but let me tell you that I’ve never done anything
before and never shall again, anything that can compare in baseness
with the dishonor which I bear now at this very minute on my breast,
here, here, which will come to pass, though I’m perfectly free to stop
it. I can stop it or carry it through, note that. Well, let me tell
you, I shall carry it through. I shan’t stop it. I told you everything
just now, but I didn’t tell you this, because even I had not brass
enough for it. I can still pull up; if I do, I can give back the full
half of my lost honor to-morrow. But I shan’t pull up. I shall carry
out my base plan, and you can bear witness that I told you so
beforehand. Darkness and destruction! No need to explain. You’ll find
out in due time. The filthy back-alley and the she-devil. Good-by.
Don’t pray for me, I’m not worth it. And there’s no need, no need at
all.... I don’t need it! Away!”

And he suddenly retreated, this time finally. Alyosha went towards the
monastery.

“What? I shall never see him again! What is he saying?” he wondered
wildly. “Why, I shall certainly see him to-morrow. I shall look him up.
I shall make a point of it. What does he mean?”


He went round the monastery, and crossed the pine-wood to the
hermitage. The door was opened to him, though no one was admitted at
that hour. There was a tremor in his heart as he went into Father
Zossima’s cell.

“Why, why, had he gone forth? Why had he sent him into the world? Here
was peace. Here was holiness. But there was confusion, there was
darkness in which one lost one’s way and went astray at once....”

In the cell he found the novice Porfiry and Father Païssy, who came
every hour to inquire after Father Zossima. Alyosha learnt with alarm
that he was getting worse and worse. Even his usual discourse with the
brothers could not take place that day. As a rule every evening after
service the monks flocked into Father Zossima’s cell, and all confessed
aloud their sins of the day, their sinful thoughts and temptations;
even their disputes, if there had been any. Some confessed kneeling.
The elder absolved, reconciled, exhorted, imposed penance, blessed, and
dismissed them. It was against this general “confession” that the
opponents of “elders” protested, maintaining that it was a profanation
of the sacrament of confession, almost a sacrilege, though this was
quite a different thing. They even represented to the diocesan
authorities that such confessions attained no good object, but actually
to a large extent led to sin and temptation. Many of the brothers
disliked going to the elder, and went against their own will because
every one went, and for fear they should be accused of pride and
rebellious ideas. People