 of strong will almost forgot the past.
Whenever he recalled it, he tried not to think of it at all. He became
active in philanthropy too, founded and helped to maintain many
institutions in the town, did a good deal in the two capitals, and in
both Moscow and Petersburg was elected a member of philanthropic
societies.

At last, however, he began brooding over the past, and the strain of it
was too much for him. Then he was attracted by a fine and intelligent
girl and soon after married her, hoping that marriage would dispel his
lonely depression, and that by entering on a new life and scrupulously
doing his duty to his wife and children, he would escape from old
memories altogether. But the very opposite of what he expected
happened. He began, even in the first month of his marriage, to be
continually fretted by the thought, “My wife loves me—but what if she
knew?” When she first told him that she would soon bear him a child, he
was troubled. “I am giving life, but I have taken life.” Children came.
“How dare I love them, teach and educate them, how can I talk to them
of virtue? I have shed blood.” They were splendid children, he longed
to caress them; “and I can’t look at their innocent candid faces, I am
unworthy.”

At last he began to be bitterly and ominously haunted by the blood of
his murdered victim, by the young life he had destroyed, by the blood
that cried out for vengeance. He had begun to have awful dreams. But,
being a man of fortitude, he bore his suffering a long time, thinking:
“I shall expiate everything by this secret agony.” But that hope, too,
was vain; the longer it went on, the more intense was his suffering.

He was respected in society for his active benevolence, though every
one was overawed by his stern and gloomy character. But the more he was
respected, the more intolerable it was for him. He confessed to me that
he had thoughts of killing himself. But he began to be haunted by
another idea—an idea which he had at first regarded as impossible and
unthinkable, though at last it got such a hold on his heart that he
could not shake it off. He dreamed of rising up, going out and
confessing in the face of all men that he had committed murder. For
three years this dream had pursued him, haunting him in different
forms. At last he believed with his whole heart that if he confessed
his crime, he would heal his soul and would be at peace for ever. But
this belief filled his heart with terror, for how could he carry it
out? And then came what happened at my duel.

“Looking at you, I have made up my mind.”

I looked at him.

“Is it possible,” I cried, clasping my hands, “that such a trivial
incident could give rise to such a resolution in you?”

“My resolution has been growing for the last three years,” he answered,
“and your story only gave the last touch to it. Looking at you, I
reproached myself and envied you.” He said this to me almost sullenly.

“But you won’t be believed,” I observed; “it’s fourteen years ago.”

“I have proofs, great proofs. I shall show them.”

Then I cried and kissed him.

“Tell me one thing, one thing,” he said (as though it all depended upon
me), “my wife, my children! My wife may die of grief, and though my
children won’t lose their rank and property, they’ll be a convict’s
children and for ever! And what a memory, what a memory of me I shall
leave in their hearts!”

I said nothing.

“And to part from them, to leave them for ever? It’s for ever, you
know, for ever!”

I sat still and repeated a silent prayer. I got up at last, I felt
afraid.

“Well?” He looked at me.

“Go!” said I, “confess. Everything passes, only the truth remains. Your
children will understand, when they grow up, the nobility of your
resolution.”

He left me that time as though he had made up his mind. Yet for more
than a fortnight afterwards, he came to me every evening, still
preparing himself, still unable to bring himself to the point. He made
my heart ache. One day he would come determined and say fervently:

“I know it will be heaven for me, heaven, the moment I confess.
Fourteen years I’ve been in hell. I want to suffer. I will take my
punishment and begin to live. You can pass through the world doing
wrong, but there’s no turning back. Now I dare not love my neighbor nor
even my own children. Good God, my children will understand, perhaps,
what my punishment has cost me and will not condemn me! God is not in
strength but in truth.”

“All will understand your sacrifice,” I said to him, “if not at once,
they will understand later; for you have served truth, the higher
truth, not of the earth.”

And he would go away seeming comforted, but next day he would come
again, bitter, pale, sarcastic.

“Every time I come to you, you look at me so inquisitively as though to
say, ‘He has still not confessed!’ Wait a bit, don’t despise me too
much. It’s not such an easy thing to do, as you would think. Perhaps I
shall not do it at all. You won’t go and inform against me then, will
you?”

And far from looking at him with indiscreet curiosity, I was afraid to
look at him at all. I was quite ill from anxiety, and my heart was full
of tears. I could not sleep at night.

“I have just come from my wife,” he went on. “Do you understand what
the word ‘wife’ means? When I went out, the children called to me,
‘Good-by, father, make haste back to read _The Children’s Magazine_
with us.’ No, you don’t understand that! No one is wise from another
man’s woe.”

His eyes were glittering, his lips were twitching. Suddenly he struck
the table with his fist so that everything on it danced—it was the
first time he had done such a thing, he was such a mild man.

“But need I?” he exclaimed, “must I? No one has been condemned, no one
has been sent to Siberia in my place, the man died of fever. And I’ve
been punished by my sufferings for the blood I shed. And I shan’t be
believed, they won’t believe my proofs. Need I confess, need I? I am
ready to go on suffering all my life for the blood I have shed, if only
my wife and children may be spared. Will it be just to ruin them with
me? Aren’t we making a mistake? What is right in this case? And will
people recognize it, will they appreciate it, will they respect it?”

“Good Lord!” I thought to myself, “he is thinking of other people’s
respect at such a moment!” And I felt so sorry for him then, that I
believe I would have shared his fate if it could have comforted him. I
saw he was beside himself. I was aghast, realizing with my heart as
well as my mind what such a resolution meant.

“Decide my fate!” he exclaimed again.

“Go and confess,” I whispered to him. My voice failed me, but I
whispered it firmly. I took up the New Testament from the table, the
Russian translation, and showed him the Gospel of St. John, chapter
xii. verse 24:

“Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a corn of wheat fall into the
ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much
fruit.”

I had just been reading that verse when he came in. He read it.

“That’s true,” he said, but he smiled bitterly. “It’s terrible the
things you find in those books,” he said, after a pause. “It’s easy
enough to thrust them upon one. And who wrote them? Can they have been
written by men?”

“The Holy Spirit wrote them,” said I.

“It’s easy for you to prate,” he smiled again, this time almost with
hatred.

I took the book again, opened it in another place and showed him the
Epistle to the Hebrews, chapter x. verse 31. He read:

“It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.”

He read it and simply flung down the book. He was trembling all over.

“An awful text,” he said. “There’s no denying you’ve picked out fitting
ones.” He rose from the chair. “Well!” he said, “good-by, perhaps I
shan’t come again ... we shall meet in heaven. So I have been for
fourteen years ‘in the hands of the living God,’ that’s how one must
think of those fourteen years. To-morrow I will beseech those hands to
let me go.”

I wanted to take him in my arms and kiss him, but I did not dare—his
face was contorted and somber. He went away.

“Good God,” I thought, “what has he gone to face!” I fell on my knees
before the ikon and wept for him before the Holy Mother of God, our
swift defender and helper. I was half an hour praying in tears, and it
was late, about midnight. Suddenly I saw the door open and he came in
again. I was surprised.

“Where have you been?” I asked him.

“I think,” he said, “I’ve forgotten something ... my handkerchief, I
think.... Well, even if I’ve not forgotten anything, let me stay a
little.”

He sat down. I stood over him.

“You sit down, too,” said he.

I sat down. We sat still for two minutes; he looked intently at me and
suddenly smiled—I remembered that—then he got up, embraced me warmly
and kissed me.

“Remember,” he said, “how I came to you a second time. Do you hear,
remember it!”

And he went out.

“To-morrow,” I thought.

And so it was. I did not know that evening that the next day was his
birthday. I had not been out for the last few days, so I had no chance
of hearing it from any one. On that day he always had a great
gathering, every one in the town went to it. It was the same this time.
After dinner he walked into the middle of the room, with a paper in his
hand—a formal declaration to the chief of his department who was
present. This declaration he read aloud to the whole assembly. It
contained a full account of the crime, in every detail.

“I cut myself off from men as a monster. God has visited me,” he said
in conclusion. “I want to suffer for my sin!”

Then he brought out and laid on the table all the things he had been
keeping for fourteen years, that he thought would prove his crime, the
jewels belonging to the murdered woman which he had stolen to divert
suspicion, a cross and a locket taken from her neck with a portrait of
her betrothed in the locket, her notebook and two letters; one from her
betrothed, telling her that he would soon be with her, and her
unfinished answer left on the table to be sent off next day. He carried
off these two letters—what for? Why had he kept them for fourteen years
afterwards instead of destroying them as evidence against him?

And this is what happened: every one was amazed and horrified, every
one refused to believe it and thought that he was deranged, though all
listened with intense curiosity. A few days later it was fully decided
and agreed in every house that the unhappy man was mad. The legal
authorities could not refuse to take the case up, but they too dropped
it. Though the trinkets and letters made them ponder, they decided that
even if they did turn out to be authentic, no charge could be based on
those alone. Besides, she might have given him those things as a
friend, or asked him to take care of them for her. I heard afterwards,
however, that the genuineness of the things was proved by the friends
and relations of the murdered woman, and that there was no doubt about
them. Yet nothing was destined to come of it, after all.

Five days later, all had heard that he was ill and that his life was in
danger. The nature of his illness I can’t explain, they said it was an
affection of the heart. But it became known that the doctors had been
induced by his wife to investigate his mental condition also, and had
come to the conclusion that it was a case of insanity. I betrayed
nothing, though people ran to question me. But when I wanted to visit
him, I was for a long while forbidden to do so, above all by his wife.

“It’s you who have caused his illness,” she said to me; “he was always
gloomy, but for the last year people noticed that he was peculiarly
excited and did strange things, and now you have been the ruin of him.
Your preaching has brought him to this; for the last month he was
always with you.”

Indeed, not only his wife but the whole town were down upon me and
blamed me. “It’s all your doing,” they said. I was silent and indeed
rejoiced at heart, for I saw plainly God’s mercy to the man who had
turned against himself and punished himself. I could not believe in his
insanity.

They let me see him at last, he insisted upon saying good-by to me. I
went in to him and saw at once, that not only his days, but his hours
were numbered. He was weak, yellow, his hands trembled, he gasped for
breath, but his face was full of tender and happy feeling.

“It is done!” he said. “I’ve long been yearning to see you, why didn’t
you come?”

I did not tell him that they would not let me see him.

“God has had pity on me and is calling me to Himself. I know I am
dying, but I feel joy and peace for the first time after so many years.
There was heaven in my heart from the moment I had done what I had to
do. Now I dare to love my children and to kiss them. Neither my wife
nor the judges, nor any one has believed it. My children will never
believe it either. I see in that God’s mercy to them. I shall die, and
my name will be without a stain for them. And now I feel God near, my
heart rejoices as in Heaven ... I have done my duty.”

He could not speak, he gasped for breath, he pressed my hand warmly,
looking fervently at me. We did not talk for long, his wife kept
peeping in at us. But he had time to whisper to me:

“Do you remember how I came back to you that second time, at midnight?
I told you to remember it. You know what I came back for? I came to
kill you!”

I started.

“I went out from you then into the darkness, I wandered about the
streets, struggling with myself. And suddenly I hated you so that I
could hardly bear it. Now, I thought, he is all that binds me, and he
is my judge. I can’t refuse to face my punishment to-morrow, for he
knows all. It was not that I was afraid you would betray me (I never
even thought of that), but I thought, ‘How can I look him in the face
if I don’t confess?’ And if you had been at the other end of the earth,
but alive, it would have been all the same, the thought was unendurable
that you were alive knowing everything and condemning me. I hated you
as though you were the cause, as though you were to blame for
everything. I came back to you then, remembering that you had a dagger
lying on your table. I sat down and asked you to sit down, and for a
whole minute I pondered. If I had killed you, I should have been ruined
by that murder even if I had not confessed the other. But I didn’t
think about that at all, and I didn’t want to think of it at that
moment. I only hated you and longed to revenge myself on you for
everything. The Lord vanquished the devil in my heart. But let me tell
you, you were never nearer death.”

A week later he died. The whole town followed him to the grave. The
chief priest made a speech full of feeling. All lamented the terrible
illness that had cut short his days. But all the town was up in arms
against me after the funeral, and people even refused to see me. Some,
at first a few and afterwards more, began indeed to believe in the
truth of his story, and they visited me and questioned me with great
interest and eagerness, for man loves to see the downfall and disgrace
of the righteous. But I held my tongue, and very shortly after, I left
the town, and five months later by God’s grace I entered upon the safe
and blessed path, praising the unseen finger which had guided me so
clearly to it. But I remember in my prayer to this day, the servant of
God, Mihail, who suffered so greatly.




Chapter III.
Conversations And Exhortations Of Father Zossima


_(e) The Russian Monk and his possible Significance_


Fathers and teachers, what is the monk? In the cultivated world the
word is nowadays pronounced by some people with a jeer, and by others
it is used as a term of abuse,