 then of course you will not attain to anything in the
achievement of real love; it will all get no further than dreams, and
your whole life will slip away like a phantom. In that case you will
naturally cease to think of the future life too, and will of yourself
grow calmer after a fashion in the end.”

“You have crushed me! Only now, as you speak, I understand that I was
really only seeking your approbation for my sincerity when I told you I
could not endure ingratitude. You have revealed me to myself. You have
seen through me and explained me to myself!”

“Are you speaking the truth? Well, now, after such a confession, I
believe that you are sincere and good at heart. If you do not attain
happiness, always remember that you are on the right road, and try not
to leave it. Above all, avoid falsehood, every kind of falsehood,
especially falseness to yourself. Watch over your own deceitfulness and
look into it every hour, every minute. Avoid being scornful, both to
others and to yourself. What seems to you bad within you will grow
purer from the very fact of your observing it in yourself. Avoid fear,
too, though fear is only the consequence of every sort of falsehood.
Never be frightened at your own faint-heartedness in attaining love.
Don’t be frightened overmuch even at your evil actions. I am sorry I
can say nothing more consoling to you, for love in action is a harsh
and dreadful thing compared with love in dreams. Love in dreams is
greedy for immediate action, rapidly performed and in the sight of all.
Men will even give their lives if only the ordeal does not last long
but is soon over, with all looking on and applauding as though on the
stage. But active love is labor and fortitude, and for some people too,
perhaps, a complete science. But I predict that just when you see with
horror that in spite of all your efforts you are getting farther from
your goal instead of nearer to it—at that very moment I predict that
you will reach it and behold clearly the miraculous power of the Lord
who has been all the time loving and mysteriously guiding you. Forgive
me for not being able to stay longer with you. They are waiting for me.
Good-by.”

The lady was weeping.

“Lise, Lise! Bless her—bless her!” she cried, starting up suddenly.

“She does not deserve to be loved. I have seen her naughtiness all
along,” the elder said jestingly. “Why have you been laughing at
Alexey?”

Lise had in fact been occupied in mocking at him all the time. She had
noticed before that Alyosha was shy and tried not to look at her, and
she found this extremely amusing. She waited intently to catch his eye.
Alyosha, unable to endure her persistent stare, was irresistibly and
suddenly drawn to glance at her, and at once she smiled triumphantly in
his face. Alyosha was even more disconcerted and vexed. At last he
turned away from her altogether and hid behind the elder’s back. After
a few minutes, drawn by the same irresistible force, he turned again to
see whether he was being looked at or not, and found Lise almost
hanging out of her chair to peep sideways at him, eagerly waiting for
him to look. Catching his eye, she laughed so that the elder could not
help saying, “Why do you make fun of him like that, naughty girl?”

Lise suddenly and quite unexpectedly blushed. Her eyes flashed and her
face became quite serious. She began speaking quickly and nervously in
a warm and resentful voice:

“Why has he forgotten everything, then? He used to carry me about when
I was little. We used to play together. He used to come to teach me to
read, do you know. Two years ago, when he went away, he said that he
would never forget me, that we were friends for ever, for ever, for
ever! And now he’s afraid of me all at once. Am I going to eat him? Why
doesn’t he want to come near me? Why doesn’t he talk? Why won’t he come
and see us? It’s not that you won’t let him. We know that he goes
everywhere. It’s not good manners for me to invite him. He ought to
have thought of it first, if he hasn’t forgotten me. No, now he’s
saving his soul! Why have you put that long gown on him? If he runs
he’ll fall.”

And suddenly she hid her face in her hand and went off into
irresistible, prolonged, nervous, inaudible laughter. The elder
listened to her with a smile, and blessed her tenderly. As she kissed
his hand she suddenly pressed it to her eyes and began crying.

“Don’t be angry with me. I’m silly and good for nothing ... and perhaps
Alyosha’s right, quite right, in not wanting to come and see such a
ridiculous girl.”

“I will certainly send him,” said the elder.




Chapter V.
So Be It! So Be It!


The elder’s absence from his cell had lasted for about twenty-five
minutes. It was more than half-past twelve, but Dmitri, on whose
account they had all met there, had still not appeared. But he seemed
almost to be forgotten, and when the elder entered the cell again, he
found his guests engaged in eager conversation. Ivan and the two monks
took the leading share in it. Miüsov, too, was trying to take a part,
and apparently very eagerly, in the conversation. But he was
unsuccessful in this also. He was evidently in the background, and his
remarks were treated with neglect, which increased his irritability. He
had had intellectual encounters with Ivan before and he could not
endure a certain carelessness Ivan showed him.

“Hitherto at least I have stood in the front ranks of all that is
progressive in Europe, and here the new generation positively ignores
us,” he thought.

Fyodor Pavlovitch, who had given his word to sit still and be quiet,
had actually been quiet for some time, but he watched his neighbor
Miüsov with an ironical little smile, obviously enjoying his
discomfiture. He had been waiting for some time to pay off old scores,
and now he could not let the opportunity slip. Bending over his
shoulder he began teasing him again in a whisper.

“Why didn’t you go away just now, after the ‘courteously kissing’? Why
did you consent to remain in such unseemly company? It was because you
felt insulted and aggrieved, and you remained to vindicate yourself by
showing off your intelligence. Now you won’t go till you’ve displayed
your intellect to them.”

“You again?... On the contrary, I’m just going.”

“You’ll be the last, the last of all to go!” Fyodor Pavlovitch
delivered him another thrust, almost at the moment of Father Zossima’s
return.

The discussion died down for a moment, but the elder, seating himself
in his former place, looked at them all as though cordially inviting
them to go on. Alyosha, who knew every expression of his face, saw that
he was fearfully exhausted and making a great effort. Of late he had
been liable to fainting fits from exhaustion. His face had the pallor
that was common before such attacks, and his lips were white. But he
evidently did not want to break up the party. He seemed to have some
special object of his own in keeping them. What object? Alyosha watched
him intently.

“We are discussing this gentleman’s most interesting article,” said
Father Iosif, the librarian, addressing the elder, and indicating Ivan.
“He brings forward much that is new, but I think the argument cuts both
ways. It is an article written in answer to a book by an ecclesiastical
authority on the question of the ecclesiastical court, and the scope of
its jurisdiction.”

“I’m sorry I have not read your article, but I’ve heard of it,” said
the elder, looking keenly and intently at Ivan.

“He takes up a most interesting position,” continued the Father
Librarian. “As far as Church jurisdiction is concerned he is apparently
quite opposed to the separation of Church from State.”

“That’s interesting. But in what sense?” Father Zossima asked Ivan.

The latter, at last, answered him, not condescendingly, as Alyosha had
feared, but with modesty and reserve, with evident goodwill and
apparently without the slightest _arrière-pensée_.

“I start from the position that this confusion of elements, that is, of
the essential principles of Church and State, will, of course, go on
for ever, in spite of the fact that it is impossible for them to
mingle, and that the confusion of these elements cannot lead to any
consistent or even normal results, for there is falsity at the very
foundation of it. Compromise between the Church and State in such
questions as, for instance, jurisdiction, is, to my thinking,
impossible in any real sense. My clerical opponent maintains that the
Church holds a precise and defined position in the State. I maintain,
on the contrary, that the Church ought to include the whole State, and
not simply to occupy a corner in it, and, if this is, for some reason,
impossible at present, then it ought, in reality, to be set up as the
direct and chief aim of the future development of Christian society!”

“Perfectly true,” Father Païssy, the silent and learned monk, assented
with fervor and decision.

“The purest Ultramontanism!” cried Miüsov impatiently, crossing and
recrossing his legs.

“Oh, well, we have no mountains,” cried Father Iosif, and turning to
the elder he continued: “Observe the answer he makes to the following
‘fundamental and essential’ propositions of his opponent, who is, you
must note, an ecclesiastic. First, that ‘no social organization can or
ought to arrogate to itself power to dispose of the civic and political
rights of its members.’ Secondly, that ‘criminal and civil jurisdiction
ought not to belong to the Church, and is inconsistent with its nature,
both as a divine institution and as an organization of men for
religious objects,’ and, finally, in the third place, ‘the Church is a
kingdom not of this world.’”

“A most unworthy play upon words for an ecclesiastic!” Father Païssy
could not refrain from breaking in again. “I have read the book which
you have answered,” he added, addressing Ivan, “and was astounded at
the words ‘the Church is a kingdom not of this world.’ If it is not of
this world, then it cannot exist on earth at all. In the Gospel, the
words ‘not of this world’ are not used in that sense. To play with such
words is indefensible. Our Lord Jesus Christ came to set up the Church
upon earth. The Kingdom of Heaven, of course, is not of this world, but
in Heaven; but it is only entered through the Church which has been
founded and established upon earth. And so a frivolous play upon words
in such a connection is unpardonable and improper. The Church is, in
truth, a kingdom and ordained to rule, and in the end must undoubtedly
become the kingdom ruling over all the earth. For that we have the
divine promise.”

He ceased speaking suddenly, as though checking himself. After
listening attentively and respectfully Ivan went on, addressing the
elder with perfect composure and as before with ready cordiality:

“The whole point of my article lies in the fact that during the first
three centuries Christianity only existed on earth in the Church and
was nothing but the Church. When the pagan Roman Empire desired to
become Christian, it inevitably happened that, by becoming Christian,
it included the Church but remained a pagan State in very many of its
departments. In reality this was bound to happen. But Rome as a State
retained too much of the pagan civilization and culture, as, for
example, in the very objects and fundamental principles of the State.
The Christian Church entering into the State could, of course,
surrender no part of its fundamental principles—the rock on which it
stands—and could pursue no other aims than those which have been
ordained and revealed by God Himself, and among them that of drawing
the whole world, and therefore the ancient pagan State itself, into the
Church. In that way (that is, with a view to the future) it is not the
Church that should seek a definite position in the State, like ‘every
social organization,’ or as ‘an organization of men for religious
purposes’ (as my opponent calls the Church), but, on the contrary,
every earthly State should be, in the end, completely transformed into
the Church and should become nothing else but a Church, rejecting every
purpose incongruous with the aims of the Church. All this will not
degrade it in any way or take from its honor and glory as a great
State, nor from the glory of its rulers, but only turns it from a
false, still pagan, and mistaken path to the true and rightful path,
which alone leads to the eternal goal. This is why the author of the
book _On the Foundations of Church Jurisdiction_ would have judged
correctly if, in seeking and laying down those foundations, he had
looked upon them as a temporary compromise inevitable in our sinful and
imperfect days. But as soon as the author ventures to declare that the
foundations which he predicates now, part of which Father Iosif just
enumerated, are the permanent, essential, and eternal foundations, he
is going directly against the Church and its sacred and eternal
vocation. That is the gist of my article.”

“That is, in brief,” Father Païssy began again, laying stress on each
word, “according to certain theories only too clearly formulated in the
nineteenth century, the Church ought to be transformed into the State,
as though this would be an advance from a lower to a higher form, so as
to disappear into it, making way for science, for the spirit of the
age, and civilization. And if the Church resists and is unwilling, some
corner will be set apart for her in the State, and even that under
control—and this will be so everywhere in all modern European
countries. But Russian hopes and conceptions demand not that the Church
should pass as from a lower into a higher type into the State, but, on
the contrary, that the State should end by being worthy to become only
the Church and nothing else. So be it! So be it!”

“Well, I confess you’ve reassured me somewhat,” Miüsov said smiling,
again crossing his legs. “So far as I understand, then, the realization
of such an ideal is infinitely remote, at the second coming of Christ.
That’s as you please. It’s a beautiful Utopian dream of the abolition
of war, diplomacy, banks, and so on—something after the fashion of
socialism, indeed. But I imagined that it was all meant seriously, and
that the Church might be _now_ going to try criminals, and sentence
them to beating, prison, and even death.”

“But if there were none but the ecclesiastical court, the Church would
not even now sentence a criminal to prison or to death. Crime and the
way of regarding it would inevitably change, not all at once of course,
but fairly soon,” Ivan replied calmly, without flinching.

“Are you serious?” Miüsov glanced keenly at him.

“If everything became the Church, the Church would exclude all the
criminal and disobedient, and would not cut off their heads,” Ivan went
on. “I ask you, what would become of the excluded? He would be cut off
then not only from men, as now, but from Christ. By his crime he would
have transgressed not only against men but against the Church of
Christ. This is so even now, of course, strictly speaking, but it is
not clearly enunciated, and very, very often the criminal of to-day
compromises with his conscience: ‘I steal,’ he says, ‘but I don’t go
against the Church. I’m not an enemy of Christ.’ That’s what the
criminal of to-day is continually saying to himself, but when the
Church takes the place of the State it will be difficult for him, in
opposition to the Church all over the world, to say: ‘All men are
mistaken, all in error, all mankind are the false Church. I, a thief
and murderer, am the only true Christian Church.’ It will be very
difficult to say this to himself; it requires a rare combination of
unusual circumstances. Now, on the other side, take the Church’s own
view of crime: is it not bound to renounce the present almost pagan
attitude, and to change from a mechanical cutting off of its tainted
member for the preservation of society, as at present, into completely
and honestly adopting the idea of the regeneration of the man, of his
reformation and salvation?”

“What do you mean? I fail to understand again,” Miüsov interrupted.
“Some sort of dream again. Something shapeless and even
incomprehensible. What is excommunication? What sort of exclusion? I
suspect you are simply amusing yourself, Ivan Fyodorovitch.”

“Yes, but you know, in reality it is so now,” said the elder suddenly,
and all turned to him at once. “If it were not for the Church of Christ
there would be nothing to restrain the criminal from evil-doing, no
real chastisement for it afterwards; none, that is, but the mechanical
punishment spoken of just now, which in the majority of cases only
embitters the heart; and not the real punishment, the only effectual
one, the only deterrent and softening one, which lies in the
recognition of sin by conscience.”

“How is that, may one inquire?” asked Miüsov, with lively curiosity.

“Why,” began the elder, “all these sentences to exile with hard labor,
and formerly with flogging also, reform no one, and what’s more, deter
hardly a single criminal, and the number of crimes does not diminish
but is continually