Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non- commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 



Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : / /books . qooqle . com/ 



y Google 



Digitized by Google 



DEVOTION 

TO THE 

SACRED HEART OF JESUS. 

By FATHER JOHN CROISET, 

Of the Society of Jesus. ^ 



Translated from the Italian. 



LONDON : 

BURNS & LAMBERT, 17 & 18, PORTMAN STREET, 
PORTMAN SQUARE. 

1863. 



Digitized by Google 



Imprimatur, 

Westmon., die 22 Maji. 1863. 

N. CARD. WISEMAN. 




Digitized by Google 



THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE. 



The deep and extraordinary interest taken by so 
many, in the devotion to the Sacred Heart of our 
Lord Jesus* Christ, the great fruits it has pro- 
duced, and the singular esteem entertained for it, 
by persons of universally recognized merit, have 
led to the publication of this book. It is intended 
to instruct the faithful, and satisfy their pious 
desires. There might, perhaps, have been some 
reason to fear, at the very outset, that the mere 
title of Devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
Christ, however it might attract many persons to 
read this book, might also deter many others. 
Arrested by the first words, they might be led to 
form an inaccurate idea of the devotion. To 
remove this difficulty, it has been thought well to 
explain in the beginning, what is understood by 
devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ. 
Experience has proved, that there is no one, who, 
after seeing in what it consists, does not agree, 
that it is reasonable, solid, and most useful, for 
our salvation, as well as for our perfection. 



Digitized by Google 



IV 



PREFACE. 



In the first part, are developed the motives, 
which should attract us to this devotion. In the 
second, are given the means of acquiring it. In 
the third, the practice of the Devotion is ex- 
plained, and some of the exercises supplied, which 
are suited to it. And since the Devotion may be 
wholly reduced, to the perfect love of Jesus Christ, 
especially in the Adorable Eucharist ; this perfect 
love is treated of, throughout the whole eourse of 
the work. The reason why the visit to the Blessed 
Sacrament, the august Sacrifice of our Altars, and 
Holy Communion, are spoken of at greater length, 
is, because, of all exercises of piety, there are 
none which bring us nearer to Jesus Christ, none 
more adapted to honour His Sacred Heart, and to 
inflame ours with an ardent love of Him. 

It is hoped that the reflections here made, will 
help to convince many, of the reasons for practising 
these holy exercises, and teach them at the same 
time how to practise them with fruit. A portrait 
is then drawn of a soul that truly loves Jesus 
Christ, with a view of giving a true idea of real 
and solid piety. 

The method of practising this Devotion is then 
given, by means of suitable exercises ; and the 
work is closed by Meditations adapted to the 
Devotion. Those who know the singular merit 
and exalted virtue of Father La ColombiSre, and 
are aware that Almighty God especially selected 
him, to promote the Devotion to the Sacred Heart 
of Jesus, will be glad to find in various parts of 
this book, the thoughts and sentiments of this 
great servant of Jesus Christ upon this Devotion. 

To lead Christians to the practice of this Devo- 



Digitized by Google 



PREFACE. 



V 



don, it is unnecessary to adduce either autho- 
rities, revelations, or examples. It is enough to 
know, that it tends wholly to the .perfect love 
of Jesus Christ. It has been thought well, 
however, to cite, in two or three parts of this 
book, such things as are found in the revelations 
of St. Gertrude and St. Mechtildis, bearing upon 
this- Devotion. It would be nothing short of pre- 
varication, were we to abstain, through fear of 
being considered too credulous, from pointing out 
the wonderful means, which Almighty God has 
made use of latterly, to renew the practice of this 
Devotion amongst the faithful. It cannot be 
denied, without condemning the sentiments of the 
entire Church, that there have existed at all times, 
pure and chosen souls, to whom God communi- 
cates Himself intimately. Although indeed, in- 
stances of this divine condescension and familiarity 
are most rare, nevertheless, there is not a century 
that does not furnish us with examples of it in 
some Saint. Those who have never received 
such favours, says St. Teresa, have sometimes 
a difficulty in believing in these extraordinary 
gifts : (St. Teresa in her Life, ch, 26.) But they 
should remember, that if, it be credulity to believe 
everything on such a subject, it is on the other 
hand, temerity to believe nothing. It is well here 
to state, that the revelations of St. Gertrude and of 
St Mechtildis, which we have quoted two or three 
times in this book, were examined by all the learned 

{ersons, who were then in Flanders, in France, in 
taly, in Germany, and in the most celebrated 
universities. All were unanimous in asserting 
that they were full of the spirit of God, and that 



Digitized by Google 



vi 



PREFACE. 



He alone was the author of them. Learned 
Prelates and great Saints have esteemed and ap- 
proved them. They have been cited with praise 
by celebrated Doctors. One of them has asserted, 
that, after the examination which has been made 
of them, he did not think, that a man of true 
wisdom and solid virtue, could fail to esteem 
them * 

The Spiritual Retreat of F. La Colombi&re has 
already made many pious souls acquainted, with 
the wonderful means, which Almighty God 
has employed, to inspire this Devotion. ±$ut, the 
person of whom that great servant of God speaks, 
€€ to whom" he says, " our Lord, communicates 
Himself most intimately,** took always especial 
care to lead an obscure and hidden Me, though 
honoured by God with those extraordinary graces, 
which we read of with admiration, in the fives of 
the greatest saints. We therefore exhort our 
readers to read the life of Sister Margaret 
Alacoque, Religious of the Visitation, by Mon- 
seigneur Languet, Bishop of Soissons, one of the 
greatest and most learned Prelates, that France 
has produced in these times. It was translated 

* Revelations prcediciis Fceminis facta toti Orbi inno- 
tuerunt, et a pits, eruditisque viris jam olim fuerunt appro- 
Data ; nam, et Sancti Patres passim eas citant in scriptis et 
Hbris mis .... Revelationes sanctce Gertrudis ante et 
post mortem ipsius fuerunt a doctissimis, eruditissimisque 
viris summa cum diUgentia examinaUz, quorum unus post 
occur atam illarum lectionem, scripsit sententiam hoc modo: 
Ego, inquit, in veritate divini luminis sentio, neminem qui Dei 
Spiritu sit iUustratus, posse calumniari, aut impugnare ea 
qua in hoc libro habentur, nam et Catholica sunt, et Sancta. 
Bios, Concl. Arum, fidel. C. 4. § 5. de Authent. Bevelation. 



Digitized by Google 



PREFACE. 



vii 



into Italian and printed at Venice. It will be 
seen in the person of that most virtuous virgin, 
that the arm of the Lord is not shortened, and 
that, even if it were true that the present age is 
(as some not very devout minds wish to persuade 
themselves) an age of no miracles, at all events 
there is not any age of the Church, in which great 
Saints do not appear. 



y Google 



NOTICE. 



For the greater convenience of those who may use 
this book, it has been thought well to place all the 
Meditations at the end. Some ejaculatory prayers are 
appended to them. They may be employed to feed 
devotion during the day, according to the different 
necessities of different persons. They are taken from 
the Soliloquies, the Meditations, and the Manual of 
St. Augustin, and also from the works of St. Teresa. 



Digitized by Google 



DEVOTION TO THE 



FIRST PART.— MOTIVES. 



Chapteb I. 

What is meant by Devotion to the Sacred Heart of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, and in what it consists. 

The particular object of this devotion is the immense 
love of the Son of God, which has induced Him to die 
for us, and to give Himself wholly to us in the Adorable 
Sacrament of the Altar, and this, although He foresaw 
all the ingratitude and outrages which He was to meet 
with in this state of a victim immolated till the end of 
ages ; preferring rather to expose himself daily to the 
insults and contempt of mankind, than to fail in show- 
ing us, by the greatest of all wonders, to what an excess 
He loves us. 

This is what has enkindled the piety and zeal of 
many. Reflecting on the little gratitude that is shown 
for such an excess of love, the little love that is felt for 
Jesus Christ, and the little value that is set upon His 
love for us, they have been unable to endure to see 



Digitized by Google 



2 



FIR8T PART. 



Him daily so ill-treated, without protesting to Him 
their just grief and their excessive desire to repair, as 
far as they can, so much ingratitude and contempt, by 
their ardent love, by their profound respect, and by 
every sort of homage in their power. It is with this 
intention that certain days in the year have been chosen 
in order to make a more special recognition of the ex- 
cessive love of Jesus Christ for us in the adorable 
Sacrament ; and at the same time, to make Him some 
reparation of honour for all the indignities and all the 
contempt which He has received, and still receives 
daily, in this mystery of love. And certainly, this grief 
at the sight of the little love shown to Jesus Christ 
in this adorable mystery, this intense sorrow at seeing 
Him so ill-treated, these practices of devotion which 
are suggested by love alone, and which have no other 
aim but to repair, as far as possible, the outrages He 
there endures, are, without doubt, real proofs of an 
ardent love for Jesus Christ, and visible signs of a just 
gratitude. 

It is easy to see that the object and principal motive 
of this devotion is, as we have already said, the immense 
love which Jesus Christ has for men, whilst they for 
the most part feel only contempt, or at least indifference, 
for Him. 

The end we have in view is, first, to acknowledge 
and honour, as far as we are able, by our frequent 
adorations, by a return of love, by our thanksgivings, 
and by every sort of homage, the sentiments of love 
and tenderness which Jesus Christ has for us, in the 
adorable Eucharist, where He is so little known to 
men, or at least, so little loved, even by those who do 
know Him. 

In the second place, we aim at repairing, by every 
means possible, the insults and outrages to which His 
love exposed Him, in the course of His mortal life, and 
to which the same love exposes Him still every day, in 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER I. 



8 



the most holy Sacrament of the Altar. So that this 
devotion wholly consists, properly speaking, in an 
ardent love of Jesus Christ, constantly residing amongst 
us in the adorable Eucharist, and in testifying this 
ardent love by our grief at seeing Him so little loved 
and so little honoured, and by the means we take to 
repair this contempt and this want of love. 

But as we always require, in the practice even of the 
most spiritual devotions, certain material and sensible 
objects, which, by the strong impression they make 
upon us, engage our attention, and thus facilitate the 
exercise of these devotions, the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
has been chosen, as the sensible object that is most 
worthy of our respect, and the best suited at the same 
time to the end we have in view in this devotion. 

Indeed, even if there had been no special reason for 
giving to these pious practices the name of Devotion 
to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, it would seem that 
nothing could better express the peculiar character of 
this devotion. For it is, in fact, but an exercise of 
divine love. Love is its object; love is its principal 
motive ; and love is the end at which it aims. The 
heart of man, says St. Thomas, is in a manner 
the source and seat of love. Its natural movements 
follow and imitate the, affections of the mind, and con- 
tribute not a little, by their strength or weakness, to 
foment or assuage its passions. It is on this account 
that the most tender sentiments of the soul are gene- 
rally attributed to the heart. It is this also that makes 
the hearts of the Saints an object of such singular 
veneration. 

From all that has been said, it is easy to understand 
what is meant by devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. 
It means an ardent love for Jesus Christ at the remem- 
brance of all the wonders He has wrought, to testify 
His love, especially in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, 
which is indeed the miracle of His love. It means a 

b 2 



Digitized by Google 



4 



FIRST PABT. 



lively grief at the sight of the outrages committed by 
men against Jesus Christ in this adorable mystery. It 
means an ardent desire to omit nothing in order to 
make reparation, in every way we can, for all these 
insults. This is what is understood by devotion to the 
Sacred Heart of our Lord Jesus Christ. This is what 
it principally consists in, not exclusively, as some 
perhaps have supposed, in the loving and specially 
honouring that Heart of flesh, like our own, which forms 
a part of the adorable Body of Jesus Christ. Not that 
the Sacred Heart does not merit our adoration. It is 
enough to say that it is the Heart of Jesus Christ. If 
His Body and His precious Blood deserve all our 
respect, who does not see that His Sacred Heart claims 
our homage even more particularly? If we feel a devotion 
towards His Sacred Wounds, how much more powerfully 
should we be inflamed with devotion towards His Sacred 
Heart ? This Divine Heart, r egarded as a part of the 
adorable Body of Jesus Christ, is, properly speaking, 
the material object of this devotion. The immense 
love which Jesus Christ bears towards us is its form 
or motive principle. Now, as this love is purely spi- 
ritual, it was impossible that it could come under the 
cognizance of the senses. It was therefore necessary 
to find a symbol to express it. What more appropriate 
or more natural symbol of love could be found than the 
real Heart of Jesus ? 

It is for the same reason that the Church, when she 
wishes to give us a sensible representation of the suffer- 
ings of the Son of God, which are no less spiritual than 
His love, gives us the image of His Sacred Wounds. 
So that, as devotion to the Sacred Wounds is, in 
truth, a devotion to Jesus in his sufferings, so the 
devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus is, in truth, a 
more affectionate and more ardent devotion towards 
Jesus Christ in the adorable Sacrament, in considera- 
tion of the immense love He there testifies towards us, 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER I. 



5 



and with the intention of making reparation for the 
contempt which is manifested towards it. Assuredly, 
the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ hears as close a rela- 
tion, at least, to His love, as the Sacred Wounds hear 
to His sufferings. Now, if there has ever existed, in 
every age, so great a devotion to the Sacred Wounds of 
Jesus Christ, and if the Church, in her wish to inspire 
all her children with the love of Jesus Christ, con- 
tinually places these Sacred Wounds before their eyes, 
how powerful necessarily must be the effect of the 
remembrance and representation of His Sacred Heart ? 

It will be seen, in the course of this work, that this 
devotion is not new, and that its practice is confirmed 
by the example of many great Saints. It has been 
sanctioned by various privileges. Clement X., by a 
Bull dated the 4th of October, 1674, granted great In- 
dulgences to an association of the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus, in the Church of the Seminary at Constances, 
consecrated in honour of the Sacred Heart. Inno- 
cent XII. granted, by a special Brief, a plenary Indul- 
gence in favour of the devotion to the Sacred Heart. * 

It is not necessary to adduce here the numerous 
reasons which prove the solidity of this devotion. It 
is enough to say that the love which Jesus Christ has 
for us, and of which he gives us so marvellous a proof 
in the adorable Eucharist, is its principal motive ; that 
to make reparation for the contempt with which this 
love has been treated is the principal end to which it 
is directed ; that the Sacred Heart of Jesus, all on fire 
with this love, is its sensible object, and that a most 
ardent and tender love for the person of Jesus Christ 
ought to be its fruit. 

* The reigning Pontiff, Clement XIII M at the request of 
many dioceses, provinces, and kingdoms, has allowed the feast 
to be celebrated with a proper Mass and Office. The devotion 
has in consequence rapidly spread over almost all Catholic 
countries. 



Digitized by Google 



6 



FIRST PART. 



Chapter II. 

The means employed by Almighty God to promote this 
devotion. 

Father la Colombiere, of the Society of Jesus, was 
one of the first whom Almighty God made use of to draw 
the faithful to this devotion. This great Servant of God 
was more illustrious for his glorious character of Con- 
fessor of Jesus Christ in England, than for the dis- 
tinguished post which he held of Preacher to her 
Royal Highness the Duchess of York, now Queen of 
Great Britain. He is celebrated for his works, in 
which he unites solidity with elegance, and elegance 
with unction. But he is still more esteemed^for his 
exalted virtue. He had hound himself by an express 
vow to aspire to it continually, and he attained to it in 
so short a time as to secure the admiration of all 
Catholics who knew him, and even of heretics. This 
great Servant of God conceived at once so true an idea 
of the solidity and importance of this devotion, and 
received from God such great graces by means of these 
holy practices, that he thought himself obliged to neg- 
lect nothing to make known this treasure, which belongs 
indeed to all, but which is known only to few. Let us 
hear what he has written on the subject himself in the 
Journal of his Spiritual Retreats, which he made in 
London, and the notes of which were published after 
his death. 

" At the close of this Retreat," he says, " full of con- 
fidence in the mercy of God, I have resolved to procure, 
by every means possible, the execution of what was 
prescribed to me by my Adorable Master, regarding 
His most precious Body in the most holy Sacrament of 
the Altar, where I believe Him really and truly present. 
Full of the consolations which I receive and enjoy from 
the mercy of my God, though I cannot explain what 



Digitized by GoOglc 



CHAPTER IT. 



7 



they are, I have understood that Almighty God desired 
that I should serve Him, by procuring the accomplish- 
ment of His holy designs with regard to the devotion 
which He has suggested to a person to whom He com- 
municates Himself very intimately, and for whose 
benefit He has been pleased to make use of my weak- 
ness. I have already inspired many persons in England 
with it, and I have written about it to France, and have 
begged a friend of mine to make it known where he is. 
It will be very useful there, and the number of chosen 
souls that are to be found in that Community makes 
me believe that its practice in that holy house will be 
very agreeable to God. Why cannot I, oh my God ! be 
everywhere, and publish what Thou expectest from Thy 
servants and friends ? 

" Almighty God having manifested His designs to 
the person who, there is reason to believe, is according 
to His heart, from the great graces He has granted her, 
she consulted me regarding them, and I obliged her to 
put in writing what she had said to me. This I have 
myself written in the Journal of my Retreats, since 
Almighty God has deigned to make use of my weakness 
in the execution of this design. 

" Being before the Blessed Sacrament," says this holy 
soul, " one day during the Octave of Corpus Christi, I 
received from God excessive marks of His love. As I 
felt moved with the desire of making Him some return 
and giving love for love, He said to me: ' Thou canst 
not make me a better return than by doing what I 
have so often asked of thee.' And disclosing to me 
His Divine Heart, 'Behold this Heart/ He said, ' which 
has loved men so much, and has spared nothing, even 
to consuming Itself, in order to show them Its love ; 
and in return, I receive nothing but ingratitude from 
the greater number through the contempt, the irrever- 
ence, the sacrileges, and the coldness shown towards 
me in this Sacrament of love. But, what is more 



Digitized by Google 



8 



FIRST PART. 



painful to me is, that these are hearts which are con- 
secrated to Me. I therefore ask of thee, that the first 
Friday after the Octave of the Blessed Sacrament be 
dedicated to a particular festival in honour of My Heart, 
to make It a reparation of honour by an act of atone- 
ment, and by communicating on that day, in order to 
repair the indignities which It has received during the 
time of exposition on the Altars ; and I promise thee 
that my Heart shall dilate Itself to pour abundantly 
the influences of Its divine love upon those who shall 
render It this honour.' 

" But, oh Lord, why dost Thou address Thyself," 
said this person to Him, " to so miserable a creature, 
to so poor a sinner, that by her unworthiness she is 
calculated to hinder the accomplishment of Thy design, 
when Thou hast so many generous souls to execute 
Thy desires?" 

u ' Dost thou not know/ He said, • that I make use of 
the weakest subjects to confound the strong ? that it is 
generally in the most insignificant and the poor in 
spirit that I manifest my power, in order that they may 
attribute nothing to themselves ? ' 

" Grant me then," I said to Him, " the means of 
doing what Thou commandest." 

" He then added : « Go to my servant N. and tell 
him from Me, that he must do all in his power to estab- 
lish this devotion, and to give this satisfaction to My 
Divine Heart. That he must not lose courage at the 
difficulties he will meet with, for they will not be 
wanting. But he must bear in mind, that those who 
wholly distrust themselves, and confide entirely in me, 
are all-powerful.' " 

F. la Colombiere was a person of very nice discern- 
ment, and was not one who would believe anything 
lightly. But he had received too clear a proof of the 
exalted and solid virtue of the person that spoke to 
him to fear the least illusion in this matter. He there- 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



9 



fore immediately set himself to the work which Al- 
mighty God had entrusted to him. But in order to 
accomplish it in the best manner that he could, he 
began it in his own person. He consecrated himself 
entirely to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. He offered to 
It everything in himself that he thought capable of 
honouring and pleasing It. The extraordinary graces 
which he received from this practice soon confirmed 
him in the idea he had formed of the importance and 
solidity of this devotion. No sooner did he begin to 
meditate on the tender love which Jesus Christ enter- 
tains for us in the Blessed Sacrament, where His sacred 
Heart is ever burning with love for men, and ever open 
to pour out upon them every kind of grace and bene- 
diction, than he felt deep grief at the thought of the 
horrible outrages which Jesus Christ has endured 
therein for so long a time from the malice of heretics, 
and from the extraordinary indifference which the 
greater number even of Catholics show for Jesus Christ 
in this august Sacrament. He was deeply moved at 
the remembrance of this forgetfulness, this contempt, 
and these outrages, and he was constrained to conse- 
crate himself anew to the Sacred Heart, by that beau- 
tiful prayer which he calls An Offering to the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus. This prayer will be found at the end 
of this book. The departure of the Servant of God to 
England, his imprisonment, and the short time he 
survived his return to France, did not allow him to 
publish more regarding it. But God has not left His 
work imperfect. He himself inspired this devotion, 
which, as he had made known to St. Gertrude (Life 
of St. Gertrude, book iv. c. 4), He especially reserved 
for these latter times, in order to arouse by these means 
the tepidity and sloth of the faithful. By means of a 
little book composed as it were by chance, without art, 
without study, and without design, He has inspired 
with this devotion even persons who had never appre- 



Digitized by Google 



10 



FIR8T . PART. 



ciated it, and who, at one time, without knowing in 
what it consisted, had thrown discredit upon it. Al- 
mighty God has made use of these persons in particular 
to diffuse it almost universally. 

In less than a year then was this devotion happily 
established. The wisest directors, Doctors, and Pre- 
lates have pronounced its eulogium. Preachers have 
successfully inculcated it. Chapels have been erected 
in honour of the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ Pictures 
of It have been painted and engraved. Altars have 
been raised to It. The nuns of the Visitation, who, 
animated with the spirit of their holy Founder, have 
been the most zealous, or at least the first, in this 
undertaking, have had the consolation of hearing the 
Mass composed in honour of the Sacred Heart solemnly 
sung at Dijon, in the chapel which they have built to 
the Sacred Heart of Jesus* Their example has been 
followed with the greatest benefit by many other nuns. 
This solid devotion has spread and established itself 
with marvellous success over almost the whole of 
France. It has been carried into foreign kingdoms. It 
has passed even beyond the seas. It has been founded 
at Quebec, and has already penetrated by the help of 
missionaries into Syria, the Indies, and even China. 
In a word, the universal approbation this devotion has 
met with, the esteem entertained for it by persons of 
universally recognized merit and virtue, give us reason 
to hope that in future Jesus Christ will be less forgotten, 
better served, and much more loved. 

Chapter HE. 

How just and reasonable is the devotion to the Sacred 
Heart of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

The reasons which enforce the love of Jesus Christ are 
above any mere sentiment. Souls relish them accord- 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER III. 



11 



ing to their progress in grace. It seems as though to 
wish to seek the motives that should lead us to love 
Jesus Christ is, either to forget what we are, or to 
believe that we do not know who He is. 

It might then appear useless to hring forward here 
the motives which should incline us to the devotion to 
the Sacred Heart of Jesus. This devotion is itself an 
exercise of the love we ought to have for Jesus Christ. 
But as all men are not always in the same dispositions, 
and grace is not always equal in all men, I have thought 
it well to make at least a few reflections on the three 
principal motives. They should be sufficient to convince 
any reasonable man. 

We shall show in this and the two following chapters. 
1. How just and reasonable is the devotion to the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus. 2. How useful it is both for 
our salvation and perfection. 3. What true sweetness 
there is in this devotion. In fact, whether we consider 
the sensible object of this devotion, which is the sacred 
Heart of Jesus, or confine ourselves to the principal 
and spiritual object, which is the immense love of 
Jesus Christ for men, with what respect, gratitude, 
and love should we not be filled ! 

I. The excellence of the adorable Heart of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

The Heart of Jesus is holy with the sanctity of God 
Himself. Hence it follows, that all the movements of 
His Heart, owing to the dignity of the Person from 
whom they proceed, are actions of infinite price and 
value. For they are the actions of God Incarnate. It 
is therefore just that the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ 
should be honoured with a peculiar worship. For in 
honouring It, we honour His Divine Person. 

The veneration we bear the Saints renders their 
hearts so precious to us, that we look upon them as the 



Digitized by Google 



12 



FIRST PART. 



most precious of their relics. What, then, must we 
think of the adorable Heart of Jesus Christ? Its 
claims to our love are not only higher in degree but 
different in kind. Where is the heart that was ever 
animated with dispositions so admirable, and so con- 
formable to our true interests ? Where shall we find 
one whose movements could be a source of so much 
good to us? It is in this divine Heart that all the 
designs of our salvation have been formed. It is 
through the love with which this Heart burns for us, 
that these same designs have been executed. 

This sacred Heart, says a great servant of God, is 
the seat of all virtues, the source of all benedictions, 
the refuge of all holy souls. The virtues which may 
principally he honoured in It, are — first, a most ardent 
love for God His Father, joined to a most profound 
respect, and the greatest humility that has ever existed ; 
in the second place, an infinite patience in sufferings, 
an excessive grief for the sins which He had taken 
upon Himself, the confidence of a most tender Son 
joined to the confusion of the greatest sinner ; in the 
third place, a most lively compassion for our miseries, 
an immense love for us, notwithstanding these miseries, 
and with all these emotions, each of which was exer- 
cised in the highest degree possible, an unalterable 
equanimity, proceeding from so perfect a conformity to 
the will of God, that it could not be disturbed by any 
event, however contrary it might appear to His zeal, 
His humility, His love itself, and all the other disposi- 
tions He possessed. 

This adorable Heart is still, as far as It can be, in 
the same sentiments. It is, above all, burning with 
love for man ; always open to pour out on them every 
sort of grace and blessing ; always full of compassion 
for our evils ; always urged by the desire to makQ us 
partakers of Its treasures, and to give Itself to us ; 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER HI. 



13 



always ready to receive us, and to be to us a refuge, an 
habitation, a Paradise even in this life. 

For all this, He finds nothing in the heart of man 
but hardness, forgetfulness, contempt, ingratitude. Are 
not these motives to induce Christians to honour this 
Sacred Heart, and to repair so many insults and out- 
rages, by manifest proofs of their love ? 

II. The amiable qualities which are found in (he Person of 
Jesus Christ. 

No one can apply himself to the knowledge of Jesus 
Christ, without finding in Him everything that is 
amiable in creatures, whether reasonable or devoid of 
reason. Every one has his own attraction to love. 
Some are drawn by great beauty, others by meekness. 
We see some who are drawn by the virtues in which 
they are themselves wanting, because they seem to 
them more admirable than those they possess. Others, 
again, have a greater liking for the qualities which 
agree with their own inclinations. Good qualities and 
true virtues command the love of all. But if there 
were on earth a person, says a great servant of God, 
in whom were united all motives for love, who could 
refuse to love him ? Now, all agree that all these are 
to be found united, in a most excellent degree, in the 
adorable Person of Jesus Christ ; and yet Jesus Christ 
is only loved by a very few. 

The most celebrated beauty, says the Prophet, is 
nothing but a withered flower in comparison with that 
of our divine Saviour. It appeared to me, says St. 
Teresa, that the sun cast upon the earth but a pale 
light, after I had seen in an ecstasy, some rays of the 
beauty of Jesus Christ. The most perfect creatures in 
this world are those which have the fewest defects. 
The most splendid qualities in men are accompanied 
by so many imperfections, that whilst we are attracted 



Digitized by Google 



14 



FIRST PART. 



on one side, we are repelled on the other. Jesus Christ 
alone is sovereignly perfect. Everything in Him is 
equally amiable. 

There is nothing in Him, but what ought to win all 
hearts to Him. In Him, we find united all the advan- 
tages of nature, all the riches of grace and of glory, all 
the perfections of the Divinity. We discover abysses, 
a boundless space as it were, and an infinite extent of 
greatness. In a word, this God Incarnate who loves us 
so tenderly, and whom men love so little, is the object of 
the love, the homage, the adorations and the praises of 
the whole Court of heaven. It is He who has supreme 
authority to judge men and angels. The destiny and 
the eternal happiness of all creatures is in His hands ; 
His dominion extends over all nature. All spirits 
tremble in His presence. They are obliged to adore 
Him, either by a voluntary submission of love, or by 
the forced endurance of the effects of His justice. He 
reigns absolutely in the order of grace and in glory. 
The whole world, visible and invisible, is under His 
feet. Is He not, then, an object worthy of the homage 
of mankind ? Does not this Man-God, with all His 
titles and all the glory He possesses, and loving us as 
He does, deserve that we should love Him ? 

But what still more powerfully attracts our love in 
our Divine Saviour, is, that He unites all these rare 
qualities, these magnificent titles, this eminent sove- 
reignty, with so great a meekness, and tenderness for 
us, that it is carried even to excess. His meekness is 
so amiable, that He charmed even His mortal enemies. 
He was led, says the Prophet (Isaiah liii. 9), as a sheep 
to the slaughter: and He was dumb as a lamb before his 
shearer, and he did not open His mouth. He compares 
Himself sometimes to a father, who cannot contain his 
joy at the return of a prodigal son (St Luke xv. 11) ; 
sometimes to a shepherd, who, having found his sheep 
that was lost, puts it upon his shoulders, and calls 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTEB III. 



15 



together his friends and neighbours, that they may 
rejoice because he has found it (St. Luke xv. 5). Hath 
no man condemned thee? He says to the adulterous 
woman ; Neither will I condemn thee: go and now sin 
no more (St. John viii. 10). He exercises no less 
meekness towards us every day. It is extraordinary 
what precautions it is necessary to take in the world, 
to avoid offending a friend. Men are so sensitive, that 
often a single expression of ill-humour is enough to 
make them forget twenty, thirty, forty years of service. 
A single word, spoken unseasonably, sometimes breaks 
the strongest friendship. 

It is not so with Jesus Christ. It seems incredible, 
but nevertheless it is beyond dispute, that we cannot 
possibly have a friend more grateful than He is. We 
must not imagine that He is capable of breaking 
friendship with us for a slight ingratitude. He sees 
all our weaknesses, and bears with incredible goodness 
all the miseries of those He loves. He forgets them, 
and appears not to perceive them. His compassion 
goes so far as to give comfort to those souls who are 
too much afflicted at them. He does not desire that 
our fear of displeasing Him should go so far as to 
disturb us and torment our minds. He would have us 
avoid the smallest faults ; but He does not even wish 
that we should be disquieted at great ones : He desires 
that joy, liberty and peace of heart should be the 
eternal portion of those that truly love Him. 

The least of these qualities, in one of the great ones 
of the world, would be enough to win the hearts of all 
those under him. The mere account of any of these 
virtues in a prince whom we have never seen, and are 
never likely to see, makes an impression on our hearts, 
and makes him beloved, even by strangers. Jesus 
Christ is the only one in whom all these splendid 
qualities, all these virtues, and whatever we can picture 
to ourselves as great, excellent and amiable, are to be 



Digitized by Google 



16 



FIRST PART. 



found united. How is it, then, that so many motives 
for inspiring love do not succeed in making us truly 
love Jesus Christ? It often requires so little in the 
world to gain our hearts. We give away our heart, and 
are prodigal of it for ever so little. Shalt Thou alone, 
oh my God, have no part in it? 

Can we reflect a little on these things, and not feel 
an ardent love of Jesus Christ ? Can we fail to have 
at least a lively grief at loving Him so little ? We owe 
Him our hearts, by so many titles. Can we refuse 
Him, then, this heart, if we add to all these titles the 
immense benefits with which He has presented us, and 
the ardour and excessive tenderness with which He 
has loved and does love us still, never ceasing to give 
us daily manifest proofs of the immense love He has 
for us ? 

III. The sensible proofs of the immense love (hat Jesus Christ 
has for us. 

Of all marks of love, there is none that moves the 
heart of men so deeply as benefits. Either because 
there is nothing that marks more strongly the affection 
of the person who loves; or because nothing is so 
gratifying to our nature, ever inclined, as it is, to seek 
its own interest, as a love which is of service to us. 
Jesus Christ has used this means also, in order to 
oblige us to love Him. He has presented us, He has 
loaded us with a thousand blessings, the least consi- 
deration of which far exceeds all that we can merit, hope 
for, or desire. All are continually receiving His bene- 
fits. All agree in acknowledging the excess of His love, 
of which these benefits are themselves such striking 
proofs. And yet, how few are there who are gained 
by His benefits, or feel themselves touched by His love ! 

By dint of hearing the Creation, the Incarnation, 
and Redemption constantly spoken of, we become ac- 
customed to these words, and to the things they 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTEB III. 



17 



signify : and yet, there is no one so unreasonable as 
not to be at once transported with love, for any one from 
whom he knew he had received the hundredth part of 
the least of these favours. As our soul depends much 
on the senses in its operations, we were naturally little 
moved by the thought of a purely spiritual being. 
Hence it is, that, before the Incarnation of the Word, 
notwithstanding the prodigies wrought by Almighty 
God in favour of His people, there was always a greater 
admixture of fear in their love. But now, this God has 
rendered Himself, so to speak, more sensible to us, by 
becoming man. This Man-God has done more than all 
that we could possibly have conceived, to oblige all men 
to love Him. Had He never formed the design to redeem 
us, He would have been no less holy, powerful, or happy. 
He has, however, had our salvation so much at heart, 
that it might have been supposed, seeing all that He 
has done, and the manner in which He has done it, 
that all His happiness depended upon ours. When he 
might have redeemed us at very little cost, He has 
chosen to merit for us the grace of salvation by His 
death, and by the most disgraceful and cruel death, 
the death of the Cross. When He might have applied 
His merits to us in a thousand ways, He has chosen 
the most wonderful abasement, which has astonished 
heaven and all nations, as the means of doing so. 
All this has been done in order to move our hearts, 
which are naturally grateful for the least benefit, and 
the smallest mark of friendship. Birth under circum- 
stances of the greatest poverty, a laborious and obscure 
life, a Passion loaded with insults, an infamous and 
painful death, are wonders that overpower us : and 
they are all the effects of the love which Jesus has for us. 

Have we ever well conceived the greatness of the 
benefit of our Redemption? and if so, is it possible 
that we should be only ordinarily grateful for such a 
benefit? The sin of our first Parent has, indeed, 

o 



Digitized by Google 



18 



PIR8T PART. 



drawn down upon us great evils, and has deprived us 
of great benefits. But can we look upon Jesus Christ 
in the manger, upon the Cross, or in the Blessed 
Eucharist, without acknowledging that our losses have 
been repaired with advantage? That the blessings 
which we have gained by our Redemption are at least 
equivalent to the privileges which man enjoyed in his 
state of innocence. 

The character of universal Redeemer is no less 
powerful a motive to oblige us to love Him. All were 
dead, says the Apostle, by the sin of Adam, and Jesus 
Christ has died for all. No one has been able to pre- 
serve himself from the contagion of so great an evil. 
The whole world has felt the effect of so powerful a 
remedy. Our loving Saviour has given all His blood, 
for the infidel who knows him not, and for the heretic 
who will not believe in Him, as well as for those who, 
whilst they believe in Him, yet refuse to love Him. 
How infinite is the value of His Blood ! How great a 
Saviour; and how abundant a Redemption! Jesus 
Christ has not been satisfied with paying the debts we 
had contracted. He has prevented all those which we 
might have contracted in future. He has paid, so to 
speak, in advance, before they have been incurred. 
To this we must add those powerful helps, those great 
graces, those signal favours which He heaps on faithful 
souls, and by which He sweetens and renders palat- 
able every thing that is bitter and painful in our 
existence. 

My God ! Didst Thou but grant us the grace to 
understand this excess of mercy, could it be possible 
that we should not be moved, and love Jesus Christ 
with our whole hearts ? Our Blessed Saviour is, in- 
deed, most worthy of our love, for having redeemed us 
by so difficult a means. But is He not still more 
amiable, for having done so, though compelled to it 
only by His immense charity, and by the desire He 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER III. 



19 



had to oblige us to love Him, by such striking proofs 
of His most ardent love ? 

We are utterly unworthy of being redeemed at so 
high a price. Nevertheless, Jesus Christ Himself has 
so valued us, that He has spontaneously offered this 
excessive Redemption for us. And after all this, shall 
we not love Him ? 

But we must remember that, however great and 
ineffable is all that our Lord has done for our salvation, 
the love which has led Him to do it is still greater 
than all, because it is infinite — and as if this love could 
not be satisfied, so long as there remained a miracle it 
had not wrought, He institutes the adorable Sacra- 
ment of the Altar, the sum of all His wonders. He 
truly lives with us until the end of the world. He 
gives Himself to us, under the appearances of bread 
and wine. He makes His flesh and blood the nourish- 
ment of our souls, in order to unite Himself more 
closely to us, or rather to unite us more closely to 
Him. Can we then be possessed of reason, and not 
be deeply moved at the mere recital of this marvel ? 
Can we still retain any feeling of humanity, and not 
be all inflamed with love for Jesus Christ, at the sight 
of such a benefit ? A God feels tenderness for man, 
takes delight in him, and is solicitous about him ! A 
God desires to unite Himself to us, and desires it to 
such an extent as to annihilate and immolate Himself 
daily, and to wish that we should feed upon Him every 
day, without being in the least changed, either by the 
indifference, the disgust, or the contempt of those who 
never receive Him, or by the coldness and the faults 
of those who receive Him often ! Finally, He remains 
upon our Altars, shut up within the Tabernacle, and 
this every day, and at all hours of the day. Are not 
these manifest proofs of the love which Jesus Christ 
has for us ? Are they not motives powerful enough to 
oblige us to love Him ? Ungrateful as we are, since 

c 2 

Digitized by Google 



20 



FIBST PART. 



it is for us alone that all these wonders have heen 
wrought, what are we to think? Does not Jesus 
Christ, dwelling on our Altars, deserve to he honoured 
hy us ? Does He not shew us love sufficient to merit 
a return of love? Woe and anathema to him, who, 
after all this, does not love Jesus Christ. 

To say the truth, said a great servant of God, could 
any thing shake my faith in the Blessed Eucharist, I 
should not doubt of the infinite power which Almighty 
God displays therein, but rather of the excessive love 
which God shows towards us. How what was bread, 
becomes flesh, without ceasing to appear bread : how 
the Body of Jesus Christ is at the same time in several 
places : how He can be contained in an almost indi- 
visible space : to all these wonders I have nothing to 
answer, but that God can do all things. But if I am 
asked, how can it be, that God can love a creature so 
weak and miserable as man ; and that He can love him 
ardently and to such an excess : that He can love him 
as He has loved him : I confess that I have no other 
answer to give, but that this is a truth which is above 
my comprehension : that the love which Jesus Christ 
bears us, is an excessive love, an ineffable love, an 
incomprehensible love, a love which ought to cause 
admiration and surprise in every reasonable man. 

I do not know what power these reflections may have 
in moving the faithful at the present day. But they 
have so deeply moved even the most savage and bar- 
barous nations, that they have been heard to cry out, 
at the mere recital of some of these wonders : What a 
good God is the God of the Christians ! He is a great 
benefactor, and He is worthy of love ! Who can help 
loving a God, who loves us so passionately ? These 
reflections, and the desire of making some return to a 
Saviour, who loves us with so much tenderness, and of 
shewing Him some gratitude, have filled cloisters with 
religious, and deserts with vast numbers of holy soli- 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER HI. 



21 



taries who dedicated and consecrated themselves to the 
praise and love of Jesus Christ. 

However reasonable such a mark of gratitude may 
be, it is not required of all. They are exhorted, not 
entirely to forget Jesus Christ, who has wrought the 
greatest of miracles, only to satisfy His excessive desire 
of remaining with them ; to have a little more feeling 
for the outrages which the excessive love of Jesus 
Christ, for them, causes Him to endure ; in fine, to be 
at least as grateful to Jesus Christ, who loves them so 
constantly, and who has done for them more wonders 
than they can comprehend ; to be as grateful to Him 
as they are towards men, who are ready to sacrifice 
their best friends to the least of their own interests. 

Now a devotion which tends only to inspire this 
gratitude to Jesus Christ, and is in itself, properly 
speaking, only a continual exercise of a perfectly grateful 
love, is it not a reasonable devotion ? Is it not just to 
seek to gain some love for Jesus Christ, especially at 
a time when IJe is so little loved ? There is little love 
for Him in the world, which has little sense of His 
benefits, in which His counsels are so little followed, 
and His maxims so greatly disparaged. There is little 
love for Him at a time, in which there is nothing but 
indifference for His Person, and all the gratitude and 
respect which are shown Him, may be generally re- 
duced to a few prayers and ceremonies, which dege- 
nerate through custom into mere affectation, at a time 
when His Divine presence causes weariness, and His 
precious Body, disgust 

IV. The extreme ingratitude of men towards Jesus Christ. 
However incredible may appear the love which the 
Son of God shows us in the Adorable Eucharist, there 
is something else yet more surprising. It is the ingra- 
titude with which we repay so great a love. It is 
marvellous, indeed, that Jesus Christ should take 



Digitized by Google 



FIE ST PART. 



delight in loving man. But it is most unaccount- 
able that man should not love Jesus Christ, and that 
no motive, no benefit, no excess of love can inspire him 
with the least feeling of gratitude. Jesus Christ may 
perhaps have some reason for loving men. They are 
His work. In them He loves His own gifts. In 
loving them He loves Himself. But can we have any 
reason for not loving Jesus Christ, for loving Him only 
in a small degree, for loving anything together with 
Him? Is there anything, then, in Him, that keeps 
you from Him ? Has He not yet done sufficient to 
merit our love ? Should we ever have dared to desire, 
or ever have been able to imagine, all that He has 
deigned to do, in this adorable mystery, in order to gain 
our hearts ? And yet all this has not been enough to 
oblige men to have an ardent love for Jesus Christ. 

What advantage has Jesus Christ derived from so 
wonderful an abasement ? It might in some sense be 
said that all the other mysteries, the effects of His 
love, have been accompanied by circumstances so glori- 
ous, and prodigies so striking, as to show clearly, that 
in taking care of our interests, He did not entirely 
overlook His own glory. But in this most amiable 
Sacrament, it seems as if Jesus Christ had altogether 
forgotten all these advantages, and that it was His love 
alone that engaged Him therein. Ought not, then, so 
wonderful an excess of love to excite an excessive love 
in the hearts of all men. Alas ! it is quite the contrary. 
It seems as though Jesus Christ would have been more 
loved had He loved us less. I shudder with horror, 
oh my God ! at the mere thought of the indignities 
and outrages which the impiety of wicked Christians, 
and the fury of heretics, have committed against this 
august Sacrament. With what horrible sacrileges have 
not our Altars and our Churches been profaned? 
With what repeated insults, impiety and infamy, has 
not the Body of Jesus Christ been treated ? Can any 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER in. 



28 



Christian reflect on such impiety, without conceiving 
an ardent desire to repair by every possible means 
these cruel outrages? Is it possible, then, that he 
should live without giving it a thought ? 

If, amidst the impiety which Jesus Christ meets 
with at the hands of heretics, He at least were honoured 
and ardently loved by the faithful, we might in some 
degree console ourselves for the outrages of the one, by 
the love and sincere homage of the other. But alas ! 
where are we to look for that crowd of adorers, earnestly 
bent on honouring Jesus Christ in our Churches ? Are 
not our Churches deserted? Can there be greater 
coldness and indifference than what is shown towards 
Jesus Christ in the Blessed Sacrament ? The scanty 
number that are to be seen in our Churches during the 
greater part of the day, are they not a visible proof of 
the forgetfulness and want of love of almost all Chris- 
tians? Those who approach our Altars most frequently, 
familiarise themselves with these most august mys- 
teries. It may be said, that there are Priests, whose 
familiarity with Jesus Christ goes so far as to grow 
into indifference and contempt. How many amongst 
them are there, who, by offering Him daily, increase 
in love for Him? How many who celebrate these 
divine mysteries, like persons who truly believe in 
them ? 

We perhaps think that Jesus Christ is insensible to 
such bad treatment. But can we ourselves think on 
the treatment which He receives, and be insensible, 
and not seek to make reparation by every means in 
our power ? How can anyone reflect a lit&e on these 
truths, and not dedicate himself wholly to the love of 
this Man-God, who alone has a right to the hearts of 
all. If we do not love Him, it must either be that we 
do not know Him, or that we are worse than that 
wicked demon spoken of in the life of St. Catherine of 
Genoa, who did not complain of the flames that con* 



Digitized by Google 



FIRST PART. 



sumed him, nor of the other pains which he endured, 
but only of being devoid of love, — of that love which so 
many souls know nothing of, or refuse to exercise, to 
their eternal loss. 

Let us remember, that the Sacred Heart of Jesus in 
the Blessed Sacrament has still, as far as can be, the 
same sentiments It always had. It is always inflamed 
with love for man, always sensibly touched by our 
misfortunes, always urged by the desire to make us 
partakers of Its treasures and to give Itself to us, 
always disposed to receive us, and to serve as a dwelling 
and a paradise for us, even in this life, and above all, 
as a refuge at the hour of death. And, for all this, 
what sentiments of gratitude does He find in the hearts 
of men ? what solicitude ? what love ? He loves, and 
He is not loved. We do not even know His love, 
because we do not condescend to receive the gifts by 
which He would show it to us, nor listen to the tender 
and secret declarations that He would make of it to our 
hearts. Is not this a motive powerful enough to touch 
the hearts of all who are at all reasonable, and who 
have some little tenderness for Jesus Christ? Our 
loving Saviour, in instituting this Sacrament of love, 
foresaw clearly all the ingratitude of mankind. He felt 
by anticipation in His Sacred Heart, all the grief which 
it was to cause Him. Yet all this could not keep Him 
at a distance, nor prevent Him from showing us the 
excess of His love, in the institution of this adorable 
mystery. 

Is it not just, amidst so much incredulity and cold- 
ness, so many profanations and outrages, that this God 
of love should find at least some friends of His Sacred 
Heart, who should be pained by the little love felt for 
Him, feel the injuries offered Him, be faithful and 
assiduous in adoring Him in the holy Eucharist, and 
neglect nothing in order to repair, by their love, by 
their adorations, and by every kind of homage, all the 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



25 



outrages to which the excess of His love daily exposes 
Him, in this august Sacrament ? 

This is the end which we aim at in this devotion, in 
honouring this Sacred Heart, which ought to he infi- 
nitely dearer to us than our own. The act of atone- 
ment and of oblation, the visits to the Blessed Sacra- 
ment, the prayers, the Communions, and all the other 
practices, tend only to render us more grateful and 
more faithful, by giving us an ardent love for Jesus 
Christ. There is no devotion, then, more just or 
reasonable. We shall see, in like manner, that there 
is no devotion more useful for our salvation and per- 
fection. 



Chapteb IV. 

How useful this devotion is for our salvation and our 
perfection. 

If Jesus Christ has wrought so many miracles to 
oblige us to love Him, what favours will He not do to 
those whom He sees anxious to show Him their grati- 
tude and ardent love ? He has loved us with tender- 
ness, says St. Bernard, and has loaded us with gifts, 
when we did not love Him, when even we did not wish 
that He should love us. " Dilexit non existentes, sed 
et resistentes." (St. Bern.) What gifts and graces will 
He not heap upon those who love Him, and who are so 
touched by seeing Him so little loved ? 

It has been shown clearly enough, that the devotion 
to the Sacred Heart of Jesus is a proof, or rather, a 
continual exercise of an ardent love for Jesus Christ. 
It consists, moreover, in the practice of the holiest 
exercises of our religidn. It unites in itself such power 
and tenderness, that it obtains all things from God. 
Indeed, if Jesus Christ grants such great graces to 
those who have a devotion to the instruments of His 



Digitized by Google 



FIRST PART* 



Passion, and to His Sacred Wounds, what favours will 
He not bestow on those who have a tender devotion 
towards His Sacred Heart? Reasons have been ad- 
duced in the Preface of this book, to lead any prudent 
man not to refuse his belief to the revelations of St. 
Mechtildis. Hear what this Saint says on the subject 
which we are speaking of, (Sp. Works of St. Mech- 
tildis, book ii. ch. 18.) " I saw one day," she says, 
" the Son of God. He held in His hands His own 
Heart, which was brighter than the sun, and shed rays 
of light from every part. It was then that our loving 
Saviour made known to me, that, from the plenitude of 
that Divine Heart issue all the graces which God pours 
continually upon men, according to the capacity of 
each." The same Saint testified, shortly before her 
death, that having one day earnestly begged of our 
Lord a great grace, for a person who had asked her to 
do so (book iv. chap. 14), Jesus Christ said to her: 
" My child, tell the person for whom you pray, that 
whatever she wishes for, she must seek in my Heart. 
Let her ask Me for all things in this Heart, like a son 
who knows no other artifice but what love suggests, 
and who asks of his father whatever he wants." 
, Almighty God having made known to that person 
of whom we spoke in the second chapter, and for whom 
Fr. la Colombiere had so much veneration, the great 
graces that He had annexed to the practice of this de- 
votion gave her to understand that it was by a last 
effort, so to speak, of His love for men, that He had 
resolved to discover to them the treasures of His 
Sacred Heart, and inspire them with this devotion, 
which is calculated to make the love of Jesus Christ 
spring up in the hearts of the most insensible, and to 
inflame those of the least fervent. "Publish every- 
where," said our loving Saviour, "insinuate, recom- 
mend this devotion to persons in the world, as a sure 
and easy means to obtain from Me a true love of God ; 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



to ecclesiastics and religious persons, as an effectual 
means of attaining to the perfection of their state ; to 
those who labour for the salvation of their neighbours, 
as a means of touching the most obdurate souls ; and 
finally to all the faithful, as one of the most solid and 
suitable devotions by which to gain the victory over the 
strongest passions, to restore peace and union in the 
most disunited families, to rid themselves of the most 
inveterate imperfections, to obtain a most tender and 
ardent love of Me, and finally to arrive in a short 
time, and by an easy method, at the most sublime 
perfection." 

St. Bernard, full of these sentiments, always speaks 
of the Sacred Heart of Jesus as the treasury of all 
graces, and the inexhaustible fountain of all blessings 
(St. Bern. Pass., tract i. ch. 3). "Oh most sweet 
Jesus," he cries, " what riches dost Thou enclose in 
Thy Heart, and how easy is it for us to enrich our- 
selves, possessing as we do, in the adorable Eucharist, 
tnis infinite treasure." " In this adorable Heart," says 
St. Peter Damian, " we find all the weapons necessary 
for our defence, all the remedies suited to the cure of 
our diseases, all the most powerful aids against the 
assaults of our enemies, all the sweetest consolations 
to alleviate our sufferings, all the purest delights to fill 
our souls with joy. Cor Christi cceleste gazophilacium 
et erarium est" (St. Peter Damian, Excell. of St. John 
Evang., serm. 1). " Are you afflicted ? do your enemies 
persecute you ? does the remembrance of your past sins 
trouble you ? do you feel your heart agitated by disquiet, 
by fear, or by passions ? Come and prostrate yourself 
at the foot of the Altar. Throw yourself, as it were, 
into the arms of Jesus Christ. Enter even into His 
Heart. He is the asylum and refuge of holy souls, and 
a place of shelter where our soul is in perfect security. 
Cor Christi asylum perfugii in tentationibus and tribu- 
lationibus" (Blosi Consol. of the faithful soul). " The 



Digitized by Google 



28 



FIRST PART. 



Sacred Heart of Jesus," says the devout Lanspergius^ 
" is not only the seat of all the virtues, but it is also 
the fountain of graces by which these virtues are ac- 
quired and preserved. Have a tender devotion to this 
loving Heart, which is so full of love and mercy. 
Through It ask for all that you wish to obtain and 
offer of all your actions. For this Sacred Heart is the 
treasury of all supernatural gifts. It is, so to speak, 
the way by which we unite ourselves more closely with 
God, and by which God communicates Himself more 
lovingly to us. You have in this Sacred Heart all the 
graces, all the virtues of which you stand in need, and 
you need not fear to exhaust this infinite treasure. 
Have recourse to It in all your necessities. Be faithful 
in the holy practices of a devotion so reasonable and so 
useful, and you will soon perceive its effects. Ad 
venerationem cordis piissimi Jesu, amore ac miseri- 
cordia exuberantissimi studeas te ipsum excitare, ac 
sedula devotione ipsum frequentare. Per ipsum pe- 
tenda petas, et exercitia tua offeras quia charismatum 
omnium est apotheca et ostium, per quod nos ad Deum, 
et ipse ad nos accedit .... Gratiam quoque ejus, et 
virtutes, ac prorsus quid-quid fuerit tibi (quod men- 
suram excedit) salutare, videaris tibi ex gratioso Corde 
attrahere .... Ad quod in necessitate confugias, unde 
consolationem quoque et omne auxilium haurias" (Lans- 
pergius, Shafts of Divine Love to the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus). We find also an illustrious example of this in 
the life of St. Mechtildis. The Son of God, in an ap- 
parition to her, commanded her ardently to love and to 
honour as much as possible His Sacred Heart in the 
Blessed Sacrament. He gave her His Heart as a 
pledge of His love, and as her place of refuge in life, 
and all her consolation in death. From that time the 
Saint felt within herself an extraordinary devotion 
towards the Sacred Heart, and received from It so 
many graces, that she used to say, that were she to 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



29 



write down all the gifts and favours she had received 
by means of this devotion, there would be no book, 
however large, that would suffice to contain them. The 
happy results which have been already experienced, 
and are still daily experienced, by those who have this 
devotion at heart, sufficiently confirms the sentiments 
of these beloved friends of God. 

"I am resolved,*' says the author of the Interior 
Christian (book v. ch. 23), " to depend in future only 
on Divine Providence, without seeking either consola- 
tion or support in creatures. I should be like an 
infant, which, without disquiet or fear, reposes sweetly 
in the arms of its mother, whilst it receives from her a 
thousand caresses and endearments. I confess that it 
is thus our Lord treats me. For, without seeking else- 
where wherewith to nourish and enrich my soul, I find 
in His Sacred Heart all the helps and graces of which 
I stand in need, and I find them in so great abundance, 
and I am so liberally enriched with them, that I am 
sometimes filled with astonishment, and dread my own 
negligence in receiving such great graces from this 
Sacred Heart with so little trouble of my own." 

But, even though we could not adduce in favour of 
this devotion either authority, or example, or special 
revelation, and even though Jesus Christ had not ex- 
pressed Himself so clearly and so frequently on the 
subject, would it require much reasoning to convince a 
Christian that there is nothing more solid or more ad- 
vantageous for our salvation and for our perfection, 
than a devotion which has no motive but the purest 
love of Jesus Christ ; the end of which is to repair, as 
far as possible, all the indignities which Jesus Christ 
suffers in the adorable Eucharist, and all the practices 
of which tend to make Jesus Christ honoured and 
ardently loved ? 

Can this adorable Saviour, Who has done so much 
to gain the hearts of men, refuse anything to those 



Digitized by Google 



80 



FIRST PART. 



who themselves ask of Him a place in His Heart ? If 
Jesus Christ allows Himself to be given even to those 
who do not love Him, and would have Himself carried 
to dying persons who never condescended to visit Him 
in their lifetime, and who have been insensible both to 
the manifest marks of love which He gave them and to 
the cruel outrages He received in the adorable Eucharist : 
in fine, to persons who have perhaps themselves ill- 
treated Him, what will He not do for faithful servants 
who, sensibly touched at seeing their dear Lord so little 
loved, so rarely visited, so cruelly outraged, make Him 
atonement, from time to time, for all the insults He 
receives, and neglect nothing to repair so many offences, 
by their frequent visits, their adorations, their homages, 
and chiefly their ardent love ? Is it not, then, plain 
that there is nothing more reasonable, more useful, 
than the practice of this devotion ? Can it be necessary 
to use many words in order to persuade Christians to 
practise it? 

Chapter V. 

How much true sweetness there is in the devotion to the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus. 

Although all exercises of devotion are capable of filling 
the soul with interior consolation, and all good works 
are accompanied by an unspeakable delight and joy, 
which is inseparable from the testimony of a good con- 
science, and which surpasses all other pleasures, it is 
however certain that Jesus Christ never grants so 
many even sensible favours as in the practices of devo- 
tion which tend only to honour Him in the most 
blessed Sacrament. The lives of the Saints are filled 
with examples of this truth. When did a St. Francis, 
a St. Ignatius, a St. Teresa, a St. Philip Neri, a St. 
Aloysius Gonzaga, and numberless others feel their 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER V. 



31 



hearts more inflamed with love, than when they ap- 
proached this august Sacrament ? What sighs of love 
issued from their hearts, what sweet tears streamed 
from their eyes in the celebration or in the participa- 
tion of this adorable mystery! With what consola- 
tions, with what torrents of delight, were they not 
replenished ! For indeed Jesus Christ is nowhere more 
liberal than in this august Sacrament ; so nowhere does 
He make us feel more abundantly the sweetness of His 
presence. In the other mysteries He gives us His 
graces. In this, the first grace He bestows on us, is to 
give Himself really and truly to us. Joy is ever the 
attendant of a banquet. Jesus Christ prepares a ban- 
quet daily for us in the adorable Eucharist. Can we 
be surprised if He treats His friends therein with so 
much sweetness and love ? 

As the devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ 
makes us true and faithful adorers of Jesus Christ, in 
the most blessed Sacrament, so it also procures for us 
the greatest favours. It might be said, that our Lord 
measures the singular favours He grants therein, by 
the number of insults He has received : and that, as 
there is no mystery in which He has received so many 
outrages, so there is none in which He fills with sweeter 
consolations those who neglect nothing to repair these 
indignities. The motive of this holy practice being so 
pure and so pleasing to Jesus Christ, we need not 
wonder if, as He is the best and holiest of all Masters, 
He gives so much consolation to His faithful and grate- 
ful servants, especially at a time when He meets with 
so little gratitude, so little true love, in those even, who 
make a profession of loving Him. 

As it is impossible to have this devotion at heart, 
without having, at the same time, much love for Jesus 
Christ, it is very difficult to practise it without feeling 
that sweetness and those interior consolations, which 
are, for the most part, inseparable from the exercise of 



Digitized by Google 



FIBST PART. 



pure love. And as the mere sight of the wounds of 
Jesus Christ inspires a feeling of confidence in His 
mercy, the mere remembrance of His Sacred Heart in- 
spires a joy and sweetness, that may be felt, but cannot 
be expressed. It is strange, that we approach Jesus 
Christ, and are well received by Him as often as we 
visit Him, and yet do not feel even the pleasure, that 
we ordinarily feel, when we are well received by the 
great ones of this world. Our little love for Jesus 
Christ, our great imperfections, our little faith, and a 
variety of other failings are the unhappy cause of this 
misfortune, which is far greater than we think. But 
as none of these failings are to be found in the practice 
of true devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ, 
we may say that these singular favours should be, as it 
seems, inseparable from the exercise of this devotion. 

This has been happily experienced hitherto by all 
who have been known to be devoted to the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus. It is still experienced every day, by 
those who imitate them. It is this leads us to say, 
that it seems as if Jesus Christ could not refuse His 
tenderest endearments to the friends of His Sacred 
Heart. It has been observed, that those Saints who 
have had most devotion and tenderness towards the 
Sacred Heart, have all been loaded with the most signal 
favours. They seldom speak of the devotion to the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus, without using terms which shew 
clearly the extraordinary graces and the interior sweets 
ness with which they were replenished. " It is a good 
thing, it is a sweet thing," cries out St. Bernard, " to 
dwell in this Sacred Heart ! • 0 quam bonum, quam 
jucundum habitare in Corde hoc ! exultabimus et lceta- 
bimur in Te, memores Cordis Tui.' It is enough for 
me," he continues, " to call to mind Thy Sacred Heart, 
oh sweet Jesus, to be filled with joy." 

By means of this devotion did St. Gertrude and St. 
Mechtildis receive great favours from Jesus Christ. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER V. 



38 



St Clare asserted, that it was to the tender devotion 
which she bore to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, that she 
owed, so to speak, that extraordinary sweetness which 
filled her soul every time that she presented herself 
before the Blessed Sacrament. St. Catherine of Siena 
felt herself all inflamed with the love of Jesus as soon 
as she thought of His adorable Heart. Jesus Christ, 
when appearing once to St. Mechtildis, addressed to 
her these beautiful words : " My daughter, if you wish 
for the pardon of all your negligences in my service, 
have a tender devotion towards My Heart. For it is 
the treasury of all the graces, which I continually be- 
stow upon you. It is the fountain of all those interior 
consolations and ineffable delights with which I re^ 
plenish My faithful friends.'* 

Fr. la Colombi&re expressed himself in a similar 
manner. Although Almighty God had conducted him 
for a long time in the paths of the most sublime per- 
fection, not by means of sensible consolations, but only 
by means of a lively faith, and very great trials, it 
seemed as if the Divine Spirit changed His direction 
of him, when He inspired him with the practice of this 
devotion. Hear how this Servant of God expresses 
himself, on this point, in one part of his Retreats: 
" My heart is dilated and feels delights that I can in- 
deed taste and receive from the mercy of my God, but 
not explain. Thou art infinitely good, oh my God, to 
communicate Thyself with so much mercy to the most 
ungrateful of Thy creatures, and the most unworthy 
of Thy servants. Be Thou blessed and praised for 
it eternally. I understood that God willed that I should 
serve Him, by procuring the fulfilment of His desires, 
regarding the devotion which He has suggested to a 
person, to whom He communicates Himself with great 
familiarity. Why cannot I, oh my God, be everywhere 
and publish what Thou requirest from Thy servants 
and Thy friends ?" And in another place : " Cease," 

D 



Digitized by Google 



34 



FIRST FABT. 



he cries, " cease, oh my supreme and loving Lord, to 
load me with Thy favours, I know how unworthy I am 
of them : Thou wilt accustom me to serve Thee through 
interest, or Thou wilt oblige me to do something ex- 
travagant. What would I not do, didst Thou not 
oblige me to obey my Director, in order to merit a 
moment of that sweetness which Thou impartest to me ? 
Foolish man that I am ! why do I say merit ? Pardon 
me the word, my most loving Father! I am con- 
founded by the excess of Thy goodness : I know not 
what I say. Can I merit the graces and ineffable con- 
solations with which Thou preventest and replenishest 
me? No, my God: Thou alone, by Thy sufferings, 
dost obtain for me from Thy Father all the favours 
that I receive. Be Thou eternally blessed for them. 
Load me with sorrows and miseries to give me some 
share in Thine. I shall not believe that Thou lovest 
me, unless Thou wilt grant me to suffer much and for 
a long time." 

Thus did this great man express himself in the excess 
of sweetness and interior consolation which he experi- 
enced, in the exercise of a tender devotion to the Sacred 
Heart of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Chapter VI. 

Of the devotion that the Saints have had to the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus Christ. 

As the example of the Saints is at the same time a 
powerful motive to attract us to a devotion, which they 
themselves have practised, and a particular instruction 
to teach us how to practise it; it is very much to the 
purpose to mention here the sentiments of those who 
have had the greatest tenderness, and the most gene- 
rous feelings, towards the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
Christ. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VI. 



35 



St. Clare, inflamed with love for Jesus Christ, and 
desiring to make Him some return, thought no exercise 
more suitable to prove her gratitude, than to salute and 
adore, many times every day, the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus, in the most Blessed Sacrament, and by means 
of this devotion, as we read in her life, her soul was 
filled with the sweetest delight, and the most special 
favours. "Nullo non die Cor Christi salutabat, ac 
venerabatur, quo in pietatis exercitio non modicis volup- 
tatibus perfundebatur." (Liran. Imit of J. C. in His 
Passion, b. v. ch. 6.) 

The Prayer of St. Gertrude to the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus, which will be found towards the end of this 
book, is a proof of the esteem in which the Saint held 
this devotion ; and the historian of her life, describing 
her happy death, says, that this blessed soul took its 
flight to Heaven, and reposed in the sanctuary of the 
Divinity, I mean, he adds, in the Adorable Heart of 
Jesus, which her Divine Spouse had opened to her, by 
an excess of love : " Beata ilia anima expirans, in 
ccelum ad suavissimum Cor Jesu evolavit." (Corn, a 
Lap. ch. 3). 

St Mechtildis had so high a sense of this devotion, 
that she scarcely ever spoke but of the adorable Heart 
of Jesus, and of the singular favours which she re- 
ceived every day through this devotion. This loving 
Saviour gave His Heart to her Himself, as a pledge of 
His love, and to serve her as an asylum where she 
might always find tranquillity in life, peace and un- 
speakable consolation at the hour of death : " Ecce ego 
do tibi cor meum in pignus amoris et in locum refugii, 
ut semper, maximeque in hora mortis tuse consolationem 
et requiem in illo invenias." (Corn, a Lap. p. ii. ch. 3. 
vers. 13). 

St. Catherine, of Siena, had this devotion singularly 
at heart : she made an entire donation of her heart to 
her Divine Spouse, and obtained in exchange the 

d 2 



Digitized by Google 



86 



FIRST PART. 



Heart of Jesus, protesting that in future, she neither 
desired to live nor to act, but according to the move- 
ments and inclinations of the Heart of Jesus Christ. 
" S. Catharina Senensis pro corde suo petiit et obtinuit 
Cor Christi, ut illo vegetaretur, viveret et ageret quae- 
cumque agebat " (Com. cap. 4, verse 9, Cant. Cantic). 

If you are anxious about my health, said St. Elzear 
to St. Delphina ; if you desire to hear of me, often go to 
visit our loving Saviour in the blessed Sacrament, 
enter into His Sacred Heart, and you will hear of me, 
for you will always find me there, for there is my 
usual habitation. " Hie enim habito " (Vita S. EL). 

But the words of St. Bernard not only discover to 
us, what were the beautiful sentiments that animated 
this Saint towards the adorable Heart, they also show 
us that the Devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus is 
not a devotion, merely of our own days. Oh most sweet 
Jesus, he cries, what riches dost Thou contain in Thy 
Heart ! How can it possibly be, that men have but a 
slight sense of the loss they suffer, by their forgetful- 
ness and indifference towards this loving Heart ? For 
myself, says this great Saint, I will neglect nothing to 
secure and possess It ; I will consecrate to it in future 
all my, thoughts ; Its sentiments and Its desires shall 
be mine ; in fine, I will give all to acquire so precious 
a treasure. But why need I acquire it, he adds, since 
it is truly mine ? Yes, I say it with confidence, Jesus 
is mine, since He is my head, and does not what 
belongs to the head belong also to the members ? This 
Sacred Heart, then, shall be in future the temple in 
which I will unceasingly adore Him, the victim that I 
will offer continually, the altar on which my sacrifices 
shall be offered, on which the same flames of divine 
love, with which His Heart burns, shall consume 
mine : in this Sacred Heart I shall find a model to 
regulate the movements of my own, a treasure whence 
to satisfy all that I owe to the divine justice, and a 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VI. 



37 



place of security, where, safe from shipwreck and 
storms, I shall say with David — I have found my heart 
to pray to my God. Yes, I have found this Heart in 
the adorable Eucharist ; I have there found the Heart 
of my sovereign, my good friend, my brother. This 
Heart is no other than the Heart of my loving Redeemer. 
After this, who shall ever hinder me from praying with 
confidence, and obtaining what I have asked ? Let us 
go, my brethren, let us enter this loving Heart, never 
again to depart from It My God, he continues, if so 
great consolation be felt at the mere remembrance of 
Thy Sacred Heart, what will it be to love it with ten- 
derness, to enter therein and dwell there continually ? 
Draw me entirely into this holy Heart, oh my loving 
Jesus, open to me this Heart which has so many 
attractions for me. But what ! does not Thy opened 
side offer me a place of entrance, and the very wound 
of this Sacred Heart, does it not invite me to enter 
therein? "Bonus thesaurus, bona margarita cor 
Tuum, bone Jesu ! quis hanc margaritam abjiciet quin 
potius dabo omnia, omnes cogitationes et affectus 
mentis commutabo et comparabo illam mihi, jactans 
omne cogitatum meum in corde Domini (St. Bernard 
Pass. ch. 3). 

To this should be added, what the celebrated Lans- 
pergius, well known by his works, so full of unction 
and solid piety, has left us on this subject Take 
great care, he says, to excite yourself continually by 
frequent acts of constant devotion, to honour the loving 
Heart of Jesus, so full of love and mercy for you. It 
is by means of It, that you must ask for all you would 
obtain. By means of It, and in It, you must offer to 
the Eternal Father all that you do. For this Sacred 
Heart is the treasury of all supernatural gifts and 
graces. It is, as it were, the way by which we unite 
ourselves more closely to God, and by which Almighty 
God communicates Himself more liberally to us. I 



Digitized by Google 



38 



FIRST PART. 



advise you, therefore, to place, wherever you pass most 
frequently, some devout picture, representing the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus. The sight of it will serve 
continually to remind you of your holy practices of 
devotion towards this adorable Heart, and will move 
you to love Him more and more. When you feel 
yourself touched with a more tender devotion, you may 
kiss the picture, as though you were kissing the Sacred 
Heart of our Lord Jesus Christ. To this Sacred 
Heart, you must continually endeavour to unite your 
own, wishing to have no other desires or sentiments, 
but those of Jesus Christ, persuading yourself that 
His spirit and His Sacred Heart passes, so to speak, 
into yours, and that of two hearts there becomes only 
one. Appropriate to yourself from this loving Heart 
all the graces imaginable ; you will never exhaust It. 
It is useful ; nay, it is necessary to honour with sin- 
gular devotion the Sacred Heart of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. It is your refuge ; you must fly to It in all 
your necessities, to draw from It the consolation and 
all the helps which you need. Even though all men 
should abandon and forget you, Jesus will be your one 
faithful friend. He will always keep you in His Heart.' 
Trust in Him : rest upon Him. Others may and will 
deceive you. The Sacred Heart of Jesus is the only 
one that loves you sincerely. He alone will never 
deceive you. Such is what Lanspergius says in the 
chapter entitled Exercise of Devotion to the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus. In it are two beautiful prayers to 
the Sacred Heart of Jesus and Mary, which will be 
found in the last part of this book. " Ad venerationem 
Cordis piissimi Jesu, amore ac misericordia exuberan- 
tissimi studeas te ipsum excitare, ac sedula devotione 
ipsum frequentare, iUud osculando et mente introeundo. 
Per ipsum petenda petas, et exercitia tua offeras, quia 
charismatum omnium est apotheca et ostium, per quod 
nos ad Deum, et ipse ad nos accedit Itaque figuram 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VI. 



39 



aliquam Dominici Cordis ponas in loco aliquo, quem 
ssepius transire habeas, qua ssepius exercitii tui et 
amoris tui excitandi in Deum admonearis : hanc intuens 
memor sis exilii, miserseque captivitatis in peccatis. 
Posses etiam, urgente devotione interna, figuram hanc, 
idest Cor Domini Jesu osculari, et animo tuo per- 
suadere, quasi verum deificum Cor Domini Jesu sub 
labiis habeas osculandum, in quod Cor, tuum impri- 
mere gestias, atque spiritum tuum immergere, absor- 
berique, desideres, videarisque tibi ex gratioso Corde 
ipsius attrahere in cor tuum spiritum ejus, gratiam 
quoque et virtutes, ac prorsus quid quid fuerit tibi 
(quod mensuram excedit) salutem. His enim omnibus 
Cor Jesu exuberantissime scatet. Expedit autem et 
valde pium est, Cor Domini Jesu devote honorari, ad 
quod in omni necessitate confugias, unde consolationem 
quoque, et omne auxilium haurias. Nam ubi cunc- 
torum te mortalium corda deseruerint, ubi imposuerint 
tibi, securus esto, hoc fidelissimum cor te non decipiet, 
nec derelinquet" (Lansperg. Divine love and Apos- 
tolic Perfection. Exercise of devotion to the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus, p. 129.) 

The author of the book entitled The Interior 
Christian, a person of solid and exalted piety, whose 
work is full of the spirit of Jesus Christ, has told what 
was his own practice, and what a high idea he enter- 
tained of the solidity and importance of this devotion. 
" The Sacred Heart of Jesus," he says, in the seventh 
chapter of the fourth book, " is the centre to which we 
must tend. When our soul is distracted and dissipated, 
we must conduct it tranquilly to the Heart of Jesus 
Christ, and offer to the Eternal Father the holy dis- 
positions of this adorable Heart, and unite the little we 
do with what is done by Jesus Christ with infinite 
perfection. In this manner, whilst doing nothing our- 
selves, we do much by means of Jesus Christ. Let 
the Sacred Heart of Jesus be henceforward your. 



Digitized by Google 



40 



FIRST PART. 



Oratory, devout soul. In It, and by means of It, offer 
all your prayers to God the Father ; if you wish them 
to be accepted, This is the school which you must 
frequent if you would learn the sublime science of 
God, and be instructed in its lessons so directly op- 
posed to the maxims and false opinions of the world. 
This must be your treasury from which you are to 
draw all that you may require in order to become rich — 
purity, pure love, fidelity. But the most precious and 
the most abundant riches this treasury contains are, 
humiliations, sufferings, and an ardent love of the 
greatest poverty. The esteem and love of these things 
is so precious a gift that it is only to be found in its 
original source, the Heart of a God made man. All 
other hearts, however holy and noble, possess it in a 
greater or less degree ; only as they seek it with more 
or less diligence in this treasury, the Heart of Jesus 
Christ." 

In fine, it has been observed, not only that all the 
Saints of the Church, who have seemed to be favoured 
with the highest graces, have had a most ardent and 
tender love for Jesus Christ, but also that there is not 
one, so to say, of those who have had this exceeding 
love for Jesus Christ, that has not had a singular de- 
votion to His Sacred Heart. 

Those who have read the life of St. Francis of Assisi, 
the works of St. Thomas, and those of St. Teresa, the 
lives of St. Bonaventure, St. Ignatius, St. Francis 
Xavier, St. Philip Neri, St. Francis of Sales, and St. 
Aloysius Gonzaga, will have noticed the tender devo- 
tion of these Saints towards the Heart of Jesus Christ. 
And to shew that this is still familiar to all those 
chosen souls, who burn with a most fervent charity for 
our loving Redeemer, it will suffice to read the life of 
the great servant of God, Armelle Nicolas, who died not 
long since, in the odour of sanctity. In her life, en- 
titled The Triumph of Divine Love, she says : " As 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VI. 



41 



soon as any affliction befel me, from creatures, I bad 
recourse to my loving Saviour, Who immediately filled 
me with the sweetest consolations ; you would have 
said, that He was afraid lest I should suffer any uneasi- 
ness, so solicitous was He to console me in all my 
sorrows. Frequently, also, He shewed me His opened 
Heart, that I might hide myself therein, and at the 
same moment, I found myself enclosed in this Sacred 
Heart, in such security, that all the efforts of hell 
seemed to me but weakness. For a length of time I 
could not regard myself as in any other place than in 
this Sacred Heart, so that I used to say to my friends, 
' If you wish to find me, seek for me nowhere but in the • 
Heart of my Divine Saviour, for I shall not quit it 
either by day or night. This is my retreat and place 
of refuge against all my enemies/ " 



END OF THE FIRST PART. 



Digitized by Google 



42 



SECOND PART.— MEANS. 



Chapter L 

The dispositions requisite for a tender devotion to the 
Sacred Heart of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

All the dispositions requisite for this devotion may be 
reduced to four : a great horror of sin ; a lively faith ; 
a great desire to love Jesus Christ ; and interior re- 
collection. 

I. First Disposition.— --4 great horror of Sin. 

As the end of the devotion to the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus is nothing but a most ardent and tender love for 
Jesus Christ, it is clear, that to possess this devotion, 
we must be in the state of grace, and have an extreme 
horror for every kind of sin. As the Sacred Heart is 
the fountain of purity, not only will nothing defiled be 
permitted to enter therein, but only what is most pure, 
and most capable of pleasing Him. Whatever may be 
said or done for His love and glory, unless accompanied 
by innocence of life, is a dishonour to Him. The court 
of Jesus Christ is composed only of the most pure souls ; 
His Heart cannot endure sin; one single hair dis- 
arranged, that is to say, the smallest failing, the least 
stain, gives Him a sort of horror. 

But, on the contrary, how ready an approach have 
innocence and purity to the Sacred Heart. Jesus 
loved St. John, because, as the Church sings, his sin- 
gular chastity had made him worthy of being loved 
with a singular love. He was loved in the highest 
degree, says St Cyril (St. Cyril. Alex. Comment, on 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER T. 



43 



St. John's Gospel, b. xii), because he possessed ex- 
treme purity of heart. Souls that aspire to true devo- 
tion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ, are souls that 
aspire to the quality of favourites of our adorable 
Saviour. The practice of this devotion consists, pro- 
perly speaking, only in a more tender, a more familiar 
love of Jesus Christ than that which is entertained for 
Him by the greater number of the faithful. As soon 
as a soul becomes careless about committing deliberate 
venial sins, and intends only to preserve herself from 
those which are mortal, she is not only in great danger 
of speedily losing her innocence, and the grace of God, 
but she cannot hope to enjoy that inexplicable sweet- 
ness with which Jesus Christ usually fills those who 
love Him truly and without reserve. 

It is plain, then, that at the same time that we 
undertake to be devout to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
Christ, we must resolve to neglect nothing in order to 
acquire a purity of heart, far higher than that of Chris- 
tians of ordinary virtue. Indeed, the practices of this 
devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ are, them- 
selves, most suitable means for acquiring this special 
purity. 

II. Second Disposition.— A Lively Faith. 

The second disposition is a lively faith. A languid 
faith never produces a high degree of love. The reason 
why Jesus Christ is so little loved, although all agree 
that He is worthy of love, is because the great wonders, 
by which He makes His love known to us, are not be- 
lieved as they ought to be. 

What exertions are made to give a proper reception 
to any one who is thought powerful at court ? What 
attention, what modesty, what respect, are shown in 
the presence of a person who is believed to be a king, 
even though disguised in the rags of the poorest beggar! 
What should we not do, then, in the presence of Jesus 



Digitized by Google 



44 



SECOND PART. 



Christ upon our Altars ? What attention, what res- 
pect, but, above all, what love should we not manifest 
in the presence of so loving a Redeemer, our King, and 
our Judge, concealed under the lowly appearance of 
bread, did we but sincerely believe Him to be present; 
or at least, did we but believe it with a lively faith ? 
The bones of a Saint inspire great respect ; the mere 
reading of his virtues creates in us a veneration and 
love for his person, because we have no doubt of the 
truth of what we have heard, or read, and yet the Body 
and Blood of Jesus Christ, who is living on our Altars, 
even the sight of the prodigies He works in order to 
shew us His excessive love, hardly inspire us with any 
respect, much less love ! We never find the time long 
when we are with a person whom we love. How is it, 
then, that we find a quarter of an hour before the 
Blessed Sacrament so tedious ? We find a play too 
short, though it may have lasted several hours. A Mass 
in which Jesus Christ is really and truly offered in 
sacrifice for our sins, seems to us insupportably long, if 
it last half an hour ; and yet we are persuaded that the 
Play is but a fiction, the actors are not what they ap- 
pear, and the whole performance is useless to us; 
whilst on the other hand, we profess to believe, that 
in the sacrifice of our Altars the selfsame Victim is 
offered Who offered Himself on Calvary, and that 
nothing can be more useful to us than this most august 
sacrifice. "In divino hoc sacrificio, quod in missa 
peragitur, idem ille Christus continetur et incruente 
immolatur, qui in ara crucis semel, semetipsum cruente 
obtulit, una enim, eademque est hostia." (Council of 
Trent, sess. xxii, chap 2.) 

Jesus Christ dwells in the midst of us in the same 
manner as He dwelt at Nazareth amidst His relatives. 
He was there without being known by them, and with- 
out working in their favour, the miracles that He 
wrought elsewhere. Our blindness and evil disposi- 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER I. 



45 



tions prevent Him from letting us experience the 
wonderful operations with whidh He favours those 
whom He finds well disposed. Why is it, that we de- 
plore so much the misfortune of the Jews ? Why do 
we feel so much indignation at their ill treatment of our 
Blessed Lord, whom they refused to acknowledge? 
Doubtless, because we believe the truth of this article 
of faith. Why is it, then, that we have so little feeling 
either for the neglect shown to Jesus Christ in the 
most Blessed Sacrament, where He is visited by so few, 
or for the outrages He there endures, from the very 
persons who profess to believe in Him ? Certainly be- 
cause the faith of Christians on this point is very weak. 
It is necessary, then, to have a lively faith, in order to 
have this ardent love for Jesus Christ in the most 
Blessed Sacrament, and to be touched by a sense of the 
insults to which the excess of His love for us exposes 
Him ; and to acquire, in fine, a true devotion to the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ. In order to this, we 
must lead a pure and innocent life. We must animate 
our faith by our assiduity, and especially by our pro- 
found respect when we present ourselves before the most 
Blessed Sacrament, and by every sort of good works. 
We must pray much, and often ask of God this lively 
faith. We must, in a word, act like persons who be- 
lieve, and we shall soon feel ourselves animated with 
this lively faith. 

m. Third Disposition. — A great desire of having an 
ardent love of Jesus Christ. 

The third disposition is a great desire of having an 
ardent love of Jesus Christ. It is impossible to have 
a lively faith and live in innocence without being at the 
same time inflamed with a most ardent love of Jesus 
Christ, or at least with an ardent desire of loving Him. 
This desire of having an ardent love of Jesus Christ is 
a disposition absolutely necessary for acquiring the de- 



Digitized by Google 



46 



SECOND PART. 



votion to the Sacred Heart, which is itself a continual 
exercise of this ardent love. Jesus Christ never gives 
this love but to those who earnestly desire it. The 
capacity of our heart is measured by the greatness of 
its desires. All the Saints agree that the best disposi- 
tion for acquiring a tender love of Jesus Christ is to 
have a great desire to love Him. Blessed, says the Son 
of God, are they that hunger and thirst after justice, for 
they shall have their fill. A heart must necessarily be 
purified by this ardent desire to be in a condition to be 
enkindled by the pure flames of divine love. This 
ardent desire not only disposes our heart to be inflamed 
with love for Jesus Christ ; it also obliges our loving 
Saviour to enkindle in our hearts this sacred Are. Let 
us desire truly to love Him. Such a desire, we may 
say, is always efficacious. It is unheard of that Jesus 
Christ ever refused it His love. 

Can we ask for anything more reasonable? Is it 
possible for any easier condition to be required ? Theife 
is no Christian that does not pretend to have at least a 
wish to love Jesus Christ. But how then is it, if this 
desire be so suitable a disposition for acquiring an 
ardent love for Jesus Christ, that so few have an ardent 
love of Him, though all flatter themselves they possess 
this disposition, and Jesus Christ is always ready to 
give His love to those who are well disposed ? It is 
because our heart is filled with self-love, and what we 
call a desire of loving Jesus Christ is nothing but a 
mere speculation, a barren knowledge of the obligation 
we are under of loving Him. It is an act of the intel- 
lect, not of the will. This knowledge, which is common 
to all who have any sense of the benefits which they 
have received from Him, passes for a true desire in the 
minds of many who, provided they have some specious 
pretext for deceiving themselves, readily persuade them- 
selves that they are in a good state of conscience. To 
convince ourselves that we have not a true desire of 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER I. 



47 



loving Jesus Christ, we have only to compare this pre- 
tended desire with any other desire which really in- 
fluences us. How anxious we are, what efforts we 
make, when we love anything passionately ! We are 
wholly occupied by the desire, we think of it, we speak 
of it at all times, we are continually taking measures 
and seeking means, we even lose our sleep in order to 
ensure its accomplishment And what similar effect 
has ever been produced in us by the desire we pretend 
to have of loving Jesus Christ ? Has the fear of not 
acquiring this love ever cost us much labour ? Does 
the thought of it occupy us much ? The truth is that 
we do not love Jesus Christ, and we are deceived when 
we flatter ourselves that we have a great desire of 
loving Him. The true desire of loving our divine 
Saviour approaches too nearly to true love, not to pro- 
duce the same effects. It is in vain that we make use 
of all the artifices of self-love. It will never be true 
that we have a great desire to love Jesus Christ, as long 
as we love Him so little. There is great danger that 
these sort of fruitless desires, which we sometimes feel, 
of loving Jesus Christ, may be little sparks of an almost 
extinguished fire, and real signs of the tepidity in which 
we live. If we have not tins ardent love for Jesus 
Christ, let us make, at least once in our life, some 
serious reflection on the obligation we are under of 
loving Him, and it is certain, that it will at least give 
rise to a true desire of being inflamed with this ardent 
love. 

IV. Fourth DisPOSiTiON.—Jwfenor Recollection. 

The fourth disposition necessary for this devotion, if 
we would taste its sweetness, and draw from it all its 
advantages, is interior recollection. Almighty God 
does not make Himself heard in a confusion : Non in 
commotione Dominus. A heart open to every object, a 
mind constantly scattered abroad, and incessantly occu- 



Digitized by Google 



48 



SECOND PAHT. 



pied with a variety of superfluous cares and useless 
thoughts, is not in a state to hear the voice of Him 
Who communicates Himself and speaks to the heart in 
solitude : Ducam earn in solitudinem, etloquar ad cor ejus. 

Perfect devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ 
is a continual exercise of the love of Jesus Christ. It 
cannot, then, exist without this recollection. Jesus 
Christ communicates Himself to the soul in a par- 
ticular manner hy means of this devotion. It is ne- 
cessary, then, that she should he at peace, free from 
embarrassment and from the tumult of external things ; 
in a state to hear the voice of her loving Saviour and 
taste the special graces which He bestows on a heart, 
free from all that can disquiet it, and prepared to be 
occupied with God alone. 

This interior recollection is so completely the foun- 
dation-stone of the spiritual edifice in our souls, that 
without it, it is impossible to advance in perfection. It 
may be said that all the graces which a soul, not yet 
established on this foundation, receives from God are 
but characters formed in water, or letters imprinted on 
sand. The reason is this. To advance in perfection 
we must unite ourselves more and more closely with 
God. Now, without interior recollection, we cannot 
unite ourselves with God ; for He makes His dwelling 
only amidst the peace of the mind, and the retirement 
of a soul that is not dissipated by various objects, nor 
disturbed by the perplexity of exterior occupations. 
St. Gregory observes, that when Jesus Christ wishes 
to inflame a soul with His divine love, one of the first 
graces He gives her, is a great attraction to interior 
recollection. 

It may be said, that the most ordinary source of our 
imperfections is the want of recollection and attention 
to ourselves. This is what stops so many in the path 
of piety. This it is which causes the soul to find 
scarcely any relish in the holiest exercises of devotion. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER I. 



49 



No one who had but little recollection has ever been 
very devout. Whence is it, said a holy man, that so 
many religious, so many devout persons who have good 
desires, and who seem to do all that is necessary to 
become holy, nevertheless draw so little fruit from their 
prayers, communions, spiritual reading ; and that, after 
having practised all the exterior exercises of spiritual 
life for so many years, they appear to have drawn 
scarcely any profit from them? How is it that di- 
rectors, who guide others in the path of perfection, 
remain themselves subject to their ordinary imperfec- 
tions ? that men of zeal, labourers who give themselves 
with so much ardour to the salvation of souls, persons 
who are entirely occupied in good works, still have 
passions so strong, are always subject to the same 
Mings, experience scarcely any facility in prayer, and 
pass their whole life in a sort of languor, without ever 
tasting the ineffable sweetness of peace of heart, always 
in disquiet; persons whom the thought of death ter- 
rifies, and the least misfortune depresses? All this 
comes from their negligence in guarding their heart 
and preserving it in recollection. These persons leave 
the care of their interior, and give themselves too much 
to the exterior. Hence it follows that they fail to per- 
ceive a number of failings, inconsiderate words, caprices, 
irregular affections, purely natural actions. This would 
not happen if they were attentive in regulating their 
interior, and a little more careful in their actions, so as 
to prevent the passions which there find their nourish- 
ment from daily gaining strength, and this with the 
greater danger from their being masked under an 
appearance of zeal and of virtue. 

It must therefore be acknowledged, that interior re- 
collection is so necessary for having a perfect love of 
Jesus Christ and advancing in the spiritual life, that 
we make progress therein only in proportion as we give 
ourselves to it. It was by this that St. Ignatius, St. 

E 



Digitized by Google 



50 



SECOND PABT. 



Francis of Sales, St Teresa, St. Francis Xavier, St. 
Aloysius Gonzaga attained the height of perfection. If 
we do not take care to keep ourselves recollected during 
our actions, we shall draw little fruit from them, how- 
ever excellent they may be in themselves. Let us keep 
silence if we wish to hear the voice of Jesus Christ. 
Let us keep our mind at a distance from the tumult 
and embarassment of exterior concerns, that we may he 
at liberty to converse with Him longer, and to love Him 
tenderly and ardently. 

The devil, who knows well the great advantages that 
a soul derives from this interior peace, and this custody 
of the heart, will omit nothing to make her lose this 
recollection. As he despairs of inducing her to leave 
off her exercises of devotion and her good works, he 
makes use of these good works themselves, to lead her 
to dissipate herself abroad, and go forth, so to speak, 
from that retreat, where she was safe from his persecu- 
tions. A soul, attracted by the satisfaction which is 
found in this crowd of external actions, led away by 
the specious pretext of doing much for God, becomes 
dissipated, and loses imperceptibly that union with 
God, and the sweetness of His presence, without which 
she labours much and yet advances little. A dissipated 
soul is like a lost and wandering sheep, which is 
speedily devoured by the wolf. We think that we 
shall find it easy again to enter into ourselves. But, 
besides that the presence of God is a grace, which is 
not always at our disposal, the soul is no longer in a 
state to free herself from numberless external objects 
that occupy her. She has lost the relish for spiritual 
things, by the too long sojourn she has made, so to 
speak, in a foreign country. The remorse and uneasi- 
ness she feels, whenever she fixes her attention on 
herself, make this interior recollection a torment to. 
her. She is dissipated, and in the end she loves the 
dissipation. Good God ! what a loss is it for a soul to 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER I. 



61 



spread herself continually abroad on external things ! 
What inspirations, what graces does she render useless ! 
Of what favours does she deprive herself, by the want 
of recollection ! 

If we would escape this misfortune, we must take 
great care to keep ourselves always in the presence of 
God, and to preserve the spirit of recollection in all our 
exterior occupations. When the mind is working, the 
heart must be in repose — immovable in its centre, 
which is the will of God. From this it must never 
separate itself. To acquire this interior recollection 
(for, though it is a gift of God, it is never refused to 
those who desire it with ardour, and take means to 
obtain it), we must accustom ourselves to make many 
reflections on the motives which should actuate us in 
all we do. Before beginning an action, let us always 
take a glance to see if it is well ordered, if it is pleasing 
to God, and if we are doing it for Him. During the 
action, let us from time to time raise our heart to God, 
and renew the purity of our intention. A sign that we 
are doing an action for God is, that we leave it easily, 
continue it without uneasiness or regret, and are not 
annoyed when we are interrupted in it. But the surest 
and most effectual practice to preserve interior recol- 
lection in our principal exterior actions is, to represent 
to ourselves Jesus Christ as He laboured. Let us 
represent to ourselves with what modesty and exact- 
ness He worked when He was upon earth ; how He 
applied Himself to perform perfectly all that He did ; 
and with what meekness, with what tranquillity He 
accomplished it. What a difference between His 
manner of working and ours ! If what we have to do 
is displeasing to us, what specious reasons do we not 
allege to exempt ourselves from it ! What pretexts do 
we make use of to put it off ! With what tepidity and 
indifference do we perform it ? If it suits our inclina- 
tions, we feel a degree of joy that soon causes dissipa- 



Digitized by Google 



52 



SECOND PART. 



tion in our soul. The mere thought of not succeeding, 
renders us uneasy and melancholy. Let us then pro- 
pose to ourselves Jesus Christ as a model. We must 
look at Him continually, if we wish to keep ourselves 
in interior recollection and to advance in His love. 

When it is said, that in order to preserve ourselves 
in interior recollection, we must not be too much taken 
up with external things, it is not meant that exterior 
employments which are of obligation are an impediment 
to interior recollection. We may be very recollected 
whilst in action. The greatest saints, who have had 
most intimate communication with God, and who have 
consequently been most recollected, have been most 
actively employed in external actions. Such were the 
Apostles and apostolic men who have been employed 
in the salvation of their neighbour. It is therefore a 
mistake to suppose that the greatest exterior occupa- 
tions are obstacles to interior recollection. Provided it 
be Almighty God who places us in these employments, 
these same employments are the most suitable means 
to keep us continually united with God. All that is 
necessary is, that we only lend, as it were, our mind to 
these external things, and do not give them our heart. 

We must absolutely choose one of these two things, 
said a great servant of God, either to become an interior 
man, or to lead a tepid and almost useless life. If 
we are not very careful to preserve our interior recol- 
lection, so far shall we be from fulfilling the designs of 
God, that we shall not even know them, and we shall 
never arrive, either at the degree of sanctity our state 
requires, or at perfection. 

A man that is not recollected, wanders about without 
finding rest anywhere. He seeks after all kinds of 
objects, without feeling satisfied with any. Whereas, 
if by giving himself to recollection he entered into him- 
self, he would there find God. He would feel a satis- 
faction in God, who by His presence would fill him 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER I. 



53 



with so great an abundance of His gifts, that he would 
no longer go to find elsewhere wherewith to satisfy his 
desires. This is what may be seen every day, in 
interior persons. We imagine that the love they have 
for retirement, and the pain they feel in diffusing 
themselves outwardly, is an effect of melancholy. But 
it is not so. They taste Almighty God within them- 
selves ; and the ineffable sweetness with which they 
are filled, makes them feel the diversions and pleasures 
which are met with in the world so insipid and nau- 
seous, that they have a horror of them. When we 
have once felt what Almighty God is, and relished 
spiritual things, everything connected with flesh and 
blood becomes insipid. 

What wonderful advantages are derived from the 
interior life, by those who have once established them- 
selves in it ! It may be said, that they alone relish 
Almighty God, and feel the true sweetness of virtue. 
I do not know whether it be the effect of interior recol- 
lection, or the reward of the care they take to keep 
themselves constantly united with God ; but it is 
certain that an interior man possesses faith, hope and 
charity in so sublime a degree, that nothing is capable 
of shaking him in his belief ; he finds himself insen- 
sibly superior to all human fears. He is always in the 
same state of mind, always immovable in God. He 
takes occasion to raise his heart to God, from every- 
thing he sees and hears. He sees only God in crea- 
tures, in the same manner as, when we have looked for 
a long time upon the sun, we imagine that we behold 
it in everything we look upon afterwards. 

Nor are we to suppose that recollection makes per- 
sons idle, and favours negligence. A man that is truly 
interior works more, does more good, and renders more 
service to the Church in a day, than many others who 
are not interior can render it in many years, even if 
they possessed greater natural abilities. Not only 



Digitized by Google 



64 SECOND PABT. 

because dissipation is an obstacle to the fruits of zeal, 
but because the man who is not recollected, and yet 
labours much, labours indeed fot God ; whereas, in the 
case of one who is recollected, it* is God Himself who, 
by means of that recollection, works for man. That is 
to say, a person who does not live in recollection, may 
have God for the motive of his actions, but humour, 
self-love and nature have generally the greater share in 
his good works. On the contrary, a recollected person, 
always attentive to himself and to God, always on the 
watch against the caprices of nature and the artifices 
of self-love, works for God alone, and according to the 
impression and the direction of the Spirit of God. 

The difference that is to be seen between an interior 
man and one who is not so, should be enough of itself 
to give us an esteem for recollection. We see in a man 
that is little recollected, an air of dissipation, which 
obscures the most striking actions of virtue, and which 
has in it something so repulsive, that it lessens the 
esteem we had conceived for his piety, and causes his 
words to have little or no unction. On the contrary, 
what an impression does that air of modesty, meekness 
and peace, which are visible on the countenance of a 
truly interior person — that reserve, silence, and con- 
tinual guard over himself, make upon our minds ? Does 
not all this inspire veneration and love for virtue ? It 
is very difficult to be long recollected, without being 
really devout. For it is a certain fact, that the want 
of devotion generally springs from the want of recollec- 
tion. The means of acquiring this interior recollection, 
and of preserving this precious gift, is, to be very 
careful — 1st. To avoid too great eagerness in what we 
do, and not to undertake anything which may prevent 
us from fulfilling, with entire liberty of spirit, our usual 
exercises of devotion. 2nd. Never to distract our heart 
with unnecessary occupations, so as to render it barren 
for prayer. 3rd. So to watch over ourselves, and keep 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTEB T. 



55 



ourselves so disposed, as to be always ready for prayer. 
4th. To make ourselves masters of our actions, by 
raising ourselves, as it were, above our employments, 
keeping our hearts free from the embarassment and 
tumult that are generally caused in souls, by works of 
zeal, application to study, the care of a family, com- 
merce with the world, the perplexity of business, and 
never considering the employments of our state, but as 
means to arrive at our last end. 5th. Retirement and 
silence are powerful means for gaining recollection. It 
is very difficult for a person who talks much to be very 
interior. 6th. Interior recollection is not only the sign 
of great purity of heart, it is also its reward. Blessed 
are the clean of heart, for they shall see God; that is to 
say, they shall walk continually in His presence. 7th. 
To make this exercise of the presence of God easier to 
us, we may take some sign that may remind us of it, 
as the striking of the clock, the beginning and end of 
every action, every time we enter our room or leave it, 
the sight of a picture, the arrival of a person, and 
similar circumstances. 8th. Reserve and modesty in 
all we do, are excellent means for becoming interior, 
especially if we are careful to propose to ourselves for 
a model, the modesty and meekness of Jesus Christ, 
9th. Frequent reflection is a great help to anyone that 
wishes to become interior: to consider from time to 
time, that God is within us, or rather that we are in 
Him ; that wherever we are, He sees us, He hears us, 
He is close to us,« — at prayer, at work, at table, in: 
society ; to make acts of faith in the presence of God ; 
to be modest, alone as well as in company. Finally, 
interior recollection is a gift of God. We must often 
ask this gift, and ask it as a necessary disposition for 
having an ardent love of Jesus Christ. This motive 
gives an efficacy to all our prayers. Devotion to the 
Saints who have excelled most in interior life, may be 
of great use for obtaining interior recollection. Such 



Digitized by Google 



SECOND PART. 



axe the Queen of all the Saints, St. Joseph, St. Anne, 
St Joachim, St John Baptist, and in particular, St 
Aloysius Gonzaga. 

Chapter II. 

Obstacles which prevent us from gathering all the fruit we 
ought, from the devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
Christ 

As the devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ is 
useful, easy, reasonable, and solid, in the highest 
degree, there are few persons of solid virtue who do not 
relish it and practise it. But all do not feel that ardent 
love for Jesus Christ, nor that true sweetness which 
He imparts to those who love Him, though these 
special favours are the fruit of devotion to His Sacred 
Heart. Whatever impedes the progress of souls in 
perfection, is an obstacle to the signal graces which 
this devotion procures us. These obstacles, which few 
are found to overcome, dry up, as it were, the fountain 
of these great graces, and are the reason why Almighty 
God communicates Himself only to a few. We have 
been in the habit of complaining that we scarcely ever 
taste, in our practices of devotion, that heavenly sweet- 
ness which the saints enjoyed, and which, though not 
necessarily a part of sanctity, helps very much to make 
Saints. We experience nothing but dryness, tepidity, 
and disgust, in our exercises of piety: we have no con- 
solation, no sweetness in prayer, no sentiment of devo- 
tion, either at holy Communion or Mass. We feel 
coldness and weariness in all that ought to be our 
greatest delight and our deepest interest. Upon this, 
what do we do ? We try to console ourselves by the 
thought that sanctity does not consist in sensible devo- 
tion. But whilst we are so tepid and imperfect, we 
have reason to fear that it is in punishment of our want 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IL. 



57 



of fidelity, that Almighty God does not allow us to 
experience that interior sweetness, and those spiritual 
consolations, which would help very much to make ua 
more courageous and more perfect. 

The path of perfection is not different now, from that 
in which the Saints have walked. They all acknow- 
ledge, that it is not possible to conceive greater pleasure 
than is felt in the service of God. They tell us that 
therein the soul is replenished with so great sweetness, 
that the greatest austerities and labours are delightful 
to her. She does not know what it is to feel disgust 
or melancholy. What appears most frightful, causes 
in her a joy so pure and perfect, that the most terrible 
misfortunes of fife cannot trouble it. They assure us 
that even the most severe trials which Almighty God 
sends them, have their sweetness and consolation ; that 
sin alone can destroy the peace they enjoy ; that 
Almighty God inspires them with so much confidence 
in His mercy, that their own failings do not disturb 
their peace. 

These are not the sentiments of a few only. It is 
what all the true servants of God, of every rank, of 
every nation, and in all states of life, have experienced. 
It is what they have confirmed at the moment of death, 
that moment of the greatest sincerity. What motive 
can we possibly have for imagining that persons so 
wise, of a probity and virtue so universally recognized, 
should have wished to deceive us or themselves. With 
so many irreproachable witnesses, who all speak from 
experience, and with the greatest unanimity, can any 
reasonable person doubt the truth of a fact so well 
established ? Whence is it, then, that amongst so 
many who at the present day profess piety, and seem 
to walk in the footsteps of these Saints, so few are to 
be found who receive the same graces? Without 
doubt, it is because there are very few whose virtue is 
really solid. Sanctity does not, it is true, consist in 



Digitized by Google 



&ECOKD PART. 



these feelings of sensible devotion ; but it is no less 
certain that this interior joy, that peace which all the 
misfortunes of life cannot disturb, that perfect sub* 
mission to God's will, that sweet confidence in His 
mercy, which is what is meant by this sensible devo- 
tion, has been the portion of all the Saints, and is still 
of all the true servants of God. 

We have now seen what true sweetness there is in 
the devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ- The 
fruit of this devotion is a most ardent and tender love 
for Jesus Christ, accompanied by that interior joy, that 
sweetness, that unalterable peace, which surpass all 
thought, and are so. many gifts inseparable from the 
perfect love of Jesus Christ. We are now to show 
what are the obstacles which hinder ns from deriving 
this fruit from it They may be reduced to four: 
great tepidity in the service of God ; a great fund of 
self-love ; a secret pride ; and certain passions, that we 
have notjtaken care to mortify in the beginning of our 
conversion. From these four heads, as from four fatal 
sources, proceed all those failings and imperfections, 
which keep so many souls back in the path of piety, 
destroy the most noble designs, and the most generous 
resolutions, and finally, render the most holy practices 
of devotion fruitless. 

I. First Obstacle. — Tepidity, 
As the devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ 
is a continual exercise of ardent love, it is very plain 
that tepidity is one of its greatest obstacles, and hinders 
all its fruit Though the Son of God has an infinite 
hatred of sin, He has not a horror of the sinner. He 
calls him, He seeks him, and has compassion on him. 
But His Divine Heart cannot endure a tepid soul. I 
would thou wert cold or hot, says our Blessed Saviour to 
us, but because thou art lukewarm, I will begin to vomit 
thee out of my mouth. The Heart of Jesus Christ looks 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER n. 



for pure souls, who are capable of His love. His 
Sacred Heart is always liberal. It seeks souls that are 
in a state to receive Its favours, and to reach the degree 
of perfection for which He destines them. This is what 
is not to be found in a soul that lives in tepidity. A 
tepid soul is in a state of blindness, caused by the pas- 
sions that tyrannize over her ; by the continual dissipa- 
tion in which she lives, and which prevents her from 
entering into herself ; by the multitude of sins that she 
commits, and by the subtraction of heavenly graces, 
which her resistance draws upon her. This blindness 
leads to the formation of a false conscience, under cover 
of which, as if in security, a soul whilst frequenting the 
Sacraments, may remain for many years in considerable 
sins. They are hidden from her, or disguised by pas- 
sion, because she has neither the will, nor the courage 
to correct herself of them. 

We sometimes see religious persons, or seculars who 
make a profession of piety, nourish secret aversions, 
envenomed jealousies, dangerous affections, a spirit of 
bitterness or murmuring against their superiors, a fund 
of self-love and pride, that diffuses itself over almost all 
their actions, and other failings of a like nature. In 
the midst of these they live tranquilly, falsely persuad- 
ing, or trying to persuade themselves, that there is 
nothing very sinful in all this, and seeking reasons to 
excuse faults, which Almighty God condemns as griev- 
ous sins, and which they themselves will condemn at 
the hour of death, when passion will not prevent their 



1 What makes this state still more perilous, and 
obliges Jesus Christ to reject a tepid soul, is, that she 
is in a certain way, beyond hope, for tepidity is scarcely 
ever cured. As the sins which a tepid soul commits, 
are not of that gross and scandalous kind, that horrify 
a soul which has a little fear remaining, but are purely 
interior and do not pass beyond the heart, they easily 




Digitized by 



Google 



60 



SECOND PABT. 



escape the notice of a conscience that is not over par- 
ticular, and of a soul that pays little attention to herself. 
Hence, as she does not know the greatness of her 
malady, she does not take the trouble to remedy it. 
Whereas, a great sinner, as he easily knows his sins, 
is in a better state to feel their weight and conceive a 
horror of them. And in this sense our Lord says, it 
is better to be cold than lukewarm. 

The most solid practices of devotion are useless to a 
soul that is in this unhappy state, either because the 
little profit she derives from the holiest exercises of 
piety takes from her the desire of making use of them, 
or because, in consequence of her being used to these 
holy exercises, they have less effect upon her. The 
great and terrible truths of salvation, which terrify by 
their novelty, and shake with their force the greatest 
sinners, make scarcely any impression on her, in con- 
sequence of her having gone over them so frequently 
and with so little profit. As soon as a soul gives 
herself up to tepidity, she no longer thinks of anything 
but herself. She continually seeks after what can give 
her pleasure. She has a delicacy that sometimes sur- 
passes that of the most sensual persons : a love of self, 
which not being weakened by foreign objects, is the 
stronger from being shut up in herself alone, and is 
entirely applied in forming for herself an easy and 
tranquil life. A soul in this state, insensible to the 
most striking truths of eternity, is still more insensible 
to the manifest proofs of the love of Jesus Christ for 
us. She is too far removed from the necessary dis- 
positions for devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, to 
draw any profit from it. 

The marks by which we may know if we are in the 
dangerous state of tepidity, are : 1. Great negligence 
in all spiritual exercises; prayer without attention, 
confessions without amendment, communions without 
preparation and without fruit. 2. The continual dis- 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



61 



sipation of a mind which is scarcely ever attentive to 
itself or to God, but which continually diffuses itself 
over all kinds of objects, and occupies itself in a 
thousand trifles. 3. A bad habit of performing her 
actions without any interior spirit, but either through 
caprice or habit, scarcely doing anything in which 
passion, self-love or human respect have not some 
share. 4. Sloth in acquiring the virtues belonging to 
her state. 6. A disgust for spiritual things, and es- 
pecially an indifference for great virtues. The yoke of 
Jesus Christ begins to appear heavy ; the exercises of 
piety become burdensome ; the maxims of the Gospel 
regarding the hatred of self, the love of crosses and 
humiliations, the necessity of doing violence to one- 
self, of walking by the narrow way, seem impracticable. 
The continual exercise of modesty, mortification and 
interior recollection is found insupportable, the life of 
persons of solid virtue is regarded as unhappy, and the 
practice of virtue almost impossible. The 6th effect of 
tepidity is an insensibility of conscience for lesser sins. 
We no longer feel remorse for our ordinary infidelities, 
or relapses, and we allow ourselves to commit all sorts 
of venial sins deliberately. 

But how much is it to be feared that this want of 
tenderness of conscience — this facility in continually 
falling into the same faults, and in confessing them 
without amendment — this negligence — this contempt 
for small things — this indifference for the greater vir- 
tues — this inconstancy in the exercises of piety — this 
perpetual alternation between fervour and relaxation, 
may be visible signs of a dying faith, of an almost ex- 
tinguished charity ? How much is it to be feared that 
this unhappy state of tepidity may lead us impercep- 
tibly into that of hardness of heart and insensibility ? 
It is the more dangerous, as it is less perceived, and as 
its consequences are less feared. And yet, nothing is 
more common. Such persons as do not relish the 



Digitized by Google 



62 



SECOND PART. 



devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ, those 
who draw no fruit from its practice, have great reason 
to fear that this is the ohstacle which occasions their 
disgust, and hinders them from profiting by the holiest 
exercises of piety. 

As the fatal cause of this unhappy state of tepidity 
is generally to be found in a great fund of self-love, the 
means recommended in the following chapter, for sub- 
duing, or, at least, mortifying self-love, will serve as a 
remedy for tepidity, since true mortification is in- 
separable from fervour. What has been said of tepidity 
is partly drawn from the Spiritual Ketreat, according 
to the spirit and method of Ignatius, composed by F. 
Nepveu, of the Society of Jesus. It may be useful to 
add the following reflections : 

1. It is extraordinary that there should be any 
religious persons, who, after having been generous, in 
leaving great things for God, should prefer afterwards 
in religion to be deprived of the greater graces of God, 
father than abandon some trifles which constantly 
retard their progress in the way of piety. For faults, 
however slight, when they are committed with advert- 
ence, are a continual impediment to that joy and ineffable 
sweetness, which are experienced by those who serve 
God with fervour. 

2. It is no less extraordinary that persons who have 
made such great sacrifices to secure their salvation 
and merit a happy and tranquil death, for want of a 
little generosity die with disquiet and full of regret, 
after having so long and so greatly feared to die. 

3. What is it\ that keeps us back ? It is not pos- 
sible but that, in religion, we should frequently have 
good desires. But it is astonishing that we fail to 
execute them through a kind of sloth, of which worldly 
persons would not believe us capable. We had begun 
so well to serve God : did we intend then to deceive 
men? If God was really the motive of our conversion, 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



6S 



whence is it, that though the same motive continues* 
we do not persevere ? 

4. It is certain either the Saints have done too 
much, or we do not do enough to hecome Saints. But 
some may say we must be Saints, to live as the Saints 
have lived. Let us rather say: we must become 
Saints ; and it is only by living like the Saints, that we 
can hope to become so. 

6. We are not easily tired, we do not find the time 
too lpng, when amassing riches to leave to others, or 
when occupied in procuring ourselves a vain reputation 
in the world. But to acquire eternal felicity in heaven, 
we think we have always time enough. A person with 
fine natural gifts, great talents and a lively disposition, 
some may say, cannot make up his mind to lead a 
perfect life. But when did the finest natural qualities, 
which have always been great helps to attain the most 
exalted virtue, become obstacles to sanctity ? 

* 6. What an error it is to imagine that there can be 
any age or condition unsuited to the practice of the 
highest virtues ! What will these persons say when 
they shall be shown a multitude of Saints of every age, 
of every rank, who have become great Saints in every 
state, and in all sort&of employments? Not only will 
the example of these Saints one day form our accusa- 
tion, we shall be ourselves our own condemnation. 
Whilst we attempt to excuse our tepidity, and our 
negligence, by alleging our age, our employments and 
our condition, it will be shown to us, that at the same 
age, in the same employments, and the same condition, 
we have suffered and laboured more for the world, than 
Almighty God required of us to labour in order to gain 
heaven. 

7. There is no one who would venture to say, or 
who would believe, that after spending ten years in 
the study of human sciences, he would think himself 
fortunate if he knew as much as he had learned in the 



Digitized by Google 



64 



SECOND PART. 



first six months after he began his studies. Yet we 
find persons who make profession of piety, persons 
whose chief employment is to become perfect, who, 
after ten and twenty years of study and practice in the 
sublime science of salvation, are not ashamed to say, 
and are not displeased if others believe, that they 
would think themselves very happy, if they were as 
fervent, as mortified and as holy, as they were after 
the first six months of their perfect conversion. It is 
true that they manage to stupify themselves, as it 
were, by exterior dissipation, and the insipid pleasures 
of a tepid life : but, sooner or later, they will arrive at 
the end of their life, and what sentiments will they 
have at the hour of death ? 

8. Are we well convinced of the great truths of our 
religion ? If we do not believe, we do too much. But 
if we believe, certainly we do too little. What is it 
that is at stake ? So much is said of the importance 
of salvation, of the value of the soul, of eternity. Is it 
true that I am in the world only in order to save 
my soul? that Jesus Christ became man only to 
show us that this is the only business of mankind, 
that it alone' deserves our application, alone demands 
our whole application, and depends on our applica- 
tion ? Is it true that if this affair succeeds ill all is 
lost? that to put oneself in danger of succeeding ill 
in this, is to risk all ; and that to live in tepidity, is to 
place ourselves in a kind of necessity of succeeding ill ? 
Is it true that this is the affair of eternity? Can 
Almighty God have been deceived in saying that all 
the rest is of no consequence ? Can He have employed 
His care and His providence without sufficient purpose, 
in referring all things to this one end ? Is God then 
of so little consequence, that it can be an indifferent 
matter to us whether we lose Him? Why so many 
tears, so many and such bitter regrets in hell, if the 
good, which the damned have lost, deserved so little 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTEB n. 



65 



effort to secure it ? Why shudder at the very thought 
of eternity, if it matters so little whether we be 
eternally unhappy ? But do we show any great appre- 
hension of this misfortune, if we take so little trouble 
to avoid it ? Are we taking much trouble if we con- 
tinue in the tepidity and indifference in which we 
live? 

9. If we were careful to make these reflections fre- 
quently, we should be ashamed to lead a tepid life, and 
to be so backward in God's service. We should soon 
take the resolution of loving Jesus Christ. But alas ! 
after we have made these reflections, and have been 
moved by them, the moment afterwards we seek to dis- 
tract ourselves, as if we were sorry to have made them, 
and to have been touched by them. " Compared to a 
man (says St. James ii. 28) beholding his own countenance 
in a glass. For he beheld himself, and went his way, and 
presently forgot what manner of man he was" 

II. Second Obstacle.—- Self-love. 
It is a most certain fact, that there are very few who 
do not act through self-love. All the difference that 
there is between spiritual persons and those who are 
not so is, that in the one, self-love acts without disguise, 
whilst in the others, it is less perceptible and more 
masked. Any one who would take the trouble to make 
a few reflections, on the true motives of the greater part 
of his actions, which appear the least defective, would 
discover numberless windings and turnings of a secret 
self-love which forms their principal motive and destroys 
all their fruit. We relish and approve of only such 
practices of virtue as we find easy. The specious pre- 
text of preserving our health, which we imagine to be 
so necessary for the glory of God, takes up our whole 
mind with a thousand little cares. We are careful of 
ourselves. Most kinds of mortification appear to us 
to be either indiscreet, or not suited to our age or our 

F 



Digitized by Google 



66 



SECOND PART. 



state. The thoughts and desires which God gives us, 
from time to time, of attending seriously to our perfec- 
tion, we treat as illusions. 

We wish to persuade ourselves that God does not 
require from us so high a sanctity, though He has 
granted us very great graces, or has placed us in a 
state that requires us to he great saints. We flatter 
ourselves that we have a true desire of leaving all 
things as soon as the will of God shall be manifested 
to us. In vain does God make Himself heard in the 
depth of our heart by His inspirations, in vain does He 
speak to us by means of a director or spiritual father, 
or by means of the reflections we make, of the lights 
we receive, of the examples we see, and which we our- 
selves are ready to praise. The voice of God is not 
recognized when it is opposed to self-love. The reason 
is, that it is not the will of God that we take as the rule 
of our life, but our inclination and self-love. We would 
fain make these the rule of the will of God. 

Whence comes it that there are some persons who 
are never more uneasy, more melancholy, more full of 
resentment, or ill-humoured, than when they are more 
recollected, and seem to be applying more particularly 
to their perfection ? It is because the lights they then 
receive in prayer, and the inspirations which God gives 
them, disturb them from their not being able to recon- 
cile them with the self-love that fills their minds. It 
seems as though they expected that the path of perfec- 
tion should present no difficulty, or that God should 
heap upon them sweetness and interior consolations 
before they have taken the first step in the way to per- 
fection. As the life of such persons seems well regu- 
lated, and their conduct irreproachable, they go on 
unhappily crawling and languishing during their whole 
life in this state, without ever correcting a single 
failing. 

It would be better for us, if we may say so, not to 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTEB n. 



67 



have certain virtues with the possession of which we 
comfort ourselves. We should at least acknowledge 
our indigence and misery. But the little virtue we 
possess serves only to render us daily more imperfect. 
We content ourselves with a composed exterior, a 
natural or affected modesty, an apparent virtue, which 
is rather the effect of education than of grace ; and as 
we see that we are secure from the reproaches which 
those whose lives are ill-regulated draw upon them- 
selves, we imagine that we have a great fund of virtue, 
because we do not allow many faults to appear. 

We form to ourselves a plan of devotion according to 
our humour, our natural inclination, and our caprice. 
We find many inexperienced or yielding directors who 
approve this system upon which our whole life turns, 
and thus we become insensible to the examples, the 
reflections, and the truths which move the greatest 
sinners. We need not wonder, if, being so full of self- 
love, we are always seeking our ease in trifles. We 
cannot bear to want anything, under the pretext that 
we are willing to leave all. If we deprive ourselves of 
anything, we generally do it in order that we may 
deceive ourselves by this pretended mortification, and 
enjoy in quiet many other things which are dearer to 
us, and of which we are unwilling to deprive ourselves. 
We mostly act either from nature or inclination. We 
feel tenderness only for those with whom we sympa- 
thise. We refuse nothing to our senses, and if we 
mortify them in anything, it is only in what gives us 
the least difficulty, or when such mortification does us 
honour. We are willing to do good works, but we wish 
to choose what we will do. Hence it follows that we 
feel nothing but disgust for the slightest obligations 
which our state imposes on us, whilst we find great 
attraction in more painful occupations, either because 
they are of our own choice, or because they put us under 
the necessity of exempting ourselves from the ordinary 



Digitized by Google 



68 



SECOND PABT. 



obligations of our state. We consider sickness in 
others as a visitation, and as a gift of God ; but, as 
soon as Almighty God grants us this gift, we become 
uneasy, melancholy, impatient, and anxious. It is not 
that sickness is the cause of this. But we show in 
sickness what we really are, because we have then no 
longer the motives or the means which health afforded 
us for disguising our self-love. 

From the same source, too, proceed those barren 
desires and chimerical projects which form the food of 
a spirit naturally proud, and which give nourishment 
to self-love. We propose to ourselves certain plans of 
life which we intend to carry out at certain times ; and, 
as if our conversion and sanctification were secure, we 
take no further trouble about correcting our imperfec- 
tions. Though we are convinced that mortification is 
absolutely necessary if we would be holy, we refuse the 
crosses that present themselves under the pretext that 
they are too small. We sigh after greater crosses, only 
because we see them at a greater distance. We satisfy 
ourselves in the meantime with these idle imaginations. 
We are at rest, confiding in this composed exterior, in 
these good works which please us, and in the practices 
of devotion in which we are most exact. We are in- 
toxicated, as it were, with the vain and insipid praises 
of those who flatter us. We are full of the idea of 
some virtue which we possess only in name. At length 
we find ourselves, at the close of a long life, devoid of 
merit, and often without any sentiment, more praise- 
worthy than a vain and barren desire of being then as 
virtuous as we were at the beginning of our conversion. 

Such are the effects of self-love, and few are exempt 
from it. We are to be pitied for nourishing within 
ourselves an enemy dangerous in proportion as he is 
crafty, and to be dreaded in proportion as we distrust 
him less. Now it is certain that Jesus Christ will 
never recognize as the true friends of His Heart those 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



69 



who love only their own ease, and who are so cautious 
about labouring for Him. This is what He has ex- 
pressly said in giving us the description of His true 
servants. In vain, says He, will any one flatter him- 
self that he is My disciple, because he has left for My 
love his goods, his parents, his friends, if he does not 
also renounce himself : adhuc autem et animam mam. 
We must do violence to ourselves, make war against 
our passions, stifle or at least mortify our self-love in 
everything, in order to he truly His disciples. There 
is no true love of Jesus Christ where there is no true 
mortification. 

III. Thibd Obstacle.— -4 Secret Pride. 

Secret pride is no less an obstacle to the love of 
Jesus Christ. It seems that there cannot be a greater 
obstacle to our perfection, and consequently to an ardent 
love of Jesus Christ, than the spirit of vanity, from which 
there are so very few who preserve themselves. Our 
other enemies we weaken and overcome by the practice 
of virtue ; whereas, it is in the very practice of virtue 
itself, that this enemy finds its strength. Our very 
victories are weapons which the devil makes use of, to 
vanquish us, by taking occasion from them to inspire 
us with pride. We may say, that of all vices, there is 
none that has kept so many souls back in the path of 
piety, or that has plunged so many from the highest 
perfection into tepidity, and even into sin. From this 
spirit of vanity proceed the inordinate desire that we 
have to be seen, and the excessive eagerness we feel to 
sticceed in all that we undertake. 

In vain do we torment ourselves, to assure ourselves 
that in all this we are seeking nothing but the glory of 
God. We have but to listen to our conscience, to be 
convinced that we seek nothing but our own glory. 
That excessive uneasiness which the fear of not suc- 
ceeding causes in us; that sadness and discouragement 



Digitized by Google 



70 



SECOND PART. 



we experience after a failure ; that joy and satisfaction 
we feel at the sight of the honours and praises we 
receive, are clear proofs of the spirit of vanity that 
urges us to act. 

This same spirit also mixes itself up with the 
practice of the highest virtues : we wish to he highly 
mortified, to he obliging, courteous, civil, charitable, 
and we may add, to give great edification to our neigh- 
bour, by appearing so. From the same source spring 
almost all our defects. We fill our minds insensibly 
with the idea of a pretended merit, which we do not 
possess, and which this idea alone would make us lose, 
did we really possess it. We love to recount our 
adventures. We have always some circumstance of 
our life ready, as an example of the subject on which 
we are speaking. One would say, that it is no longer 
any failing to praise ourselves continually, when we 
already bear a good reputation. We wish to possess 
the esteem and the hearts of all. Hence it is that we 
prefer to omit our obligations, rather than disoblige 
another ; and what is still more extraordinary, we try 
to cover this ambition and vanity by the specious pre- 
text of civility, charity, and condescension. We falsely 
persuade ourselves that we must act thus, in order to 
make virtue less difficult to others. We wish to please 
both God and men. By this means, we very often fail 
to please men, and we always displease God. 

From the same source spring that delicacy regarding 
the point of honour, those little coolnesses in friend- 
ship, those regrets which approach so nearly to envy, 
if they have not all its malignity; that secret pain 
which is caused by the success of others. We always 
find some accident to which the greater part of their 
good fortune is attributed. We try to lower them. 
We speak coldly of them. We consider anyone who 
speaks in their praise, either tiresome or a flatterer. 
Whence proceeds all this ? From our being filled with 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



71 



vanity and pride. We feel resentment at the least 
disagreeable word, or at the least sign of contempt. 
We think ourselves at liberty to omit certain acts of 
civility towards others ; but we do not pardon them, if 
they fail in what we consider due to us. By a still 
more ridiculous illusion, we imagine that we owe it to 
the honour of God, Whom we serve, and of that exalted 
virtue which we flatter ourselves we possess, to display 
before the world our spirit, our talents, our good quali- 
ties, natural and supernatural. If anyone after this 
does not show us all the esteem and veneration that we 
expected, this is enough to make us at once consider 
him as imperfect, or as one who has no regard for 
merit, or esteem for virtue. 

Nor are these yet all the effects of this secret ambi- 
tion. We love fame, applause and praise for all we do. 
We see some who labour much for God, but who are 
always saying how much they do. They are always 
uncomfortable, hurried, fatigued and oppressed; one 
would say that they are inviting everyone to have com- 
passion on them, in their labours. The truth is, that 
vanity has a great part in so much labour. We think 
ourselves very important and necessary ; and we wish 
to appear so. Pride comes in, even in the very actions 
that belong to humility. We love to distinguish our- 
selves in the practice of certain virtues, and even in 
the exercise of good works. But all this alacrity is not 
for God alone, it is also to secure our own distinction. 
Finally, that excessive sadness and discouragement 
which we feel after a relapse into our former failings, 
is not the effect of tenderness of conscience, as some 
imagine. It is the effect of a secret pride, which makes 
us think ourselves more holy than we really are. 

In a word, we pass for spiritual persons, we even 
think ourselves such, and yet we are influenced merely 
by human prudence, disguised under the name of good 
sense. We refer all to the rule of this pretended good 



Digitized by Google 



72 



SECOND PART. 



sense which we have framed for ourselves, in order 
that we may deceive ourselves without scruple. It is 
by this false rule that we judge even of spiritual things, 
of divine operations, and of the marvels of grace. We 
approve of nothing but what suits our ideas. The 
graces which God bestows either upon ourselves or 
others, we use according to the maxims of human pru- 
dence, and by an extraordinary blindness which is the 
chastisement of proud spirits, we think that we are 
following reason and good sense, the further we remove 
from the spirit of God. 

Are we astonished, then, with all this, that we have 
neither spiritual consolations nor sentiments of devo- 
tion, after ten or twenty years spent by us in the 
exercise of virtue and the practice of good works ? Do 
we lament that we make no progress, that we are 
always imperfect, that the use of the Sacraments is of 
little profit to us, that we do not know what sensible 
devotion is ? That secret pride which we nourish in 
the depth of our heart, dries up, as it were, the foun- 
tain of the greatest graces. It is this that causes 



spect, who have lived with so much honour, and have 
been proposed as the model of those who are called 
wealthy in the world — viri divitiarum, and who, from 
appearances, ought to be loaded with spiritual riches, 
to find themselves at death with their hands empty 
of good works. This self-love, this little ambition, this 
secret pride, have robbed them of all, and corrupted 
everything. This is the worm that withers the loftiest 
oaks ; this is the leaven that, sooner or later, corrupts 
the whole mass, or at least inflates it, and fills it 
with nothing but wind. 

It is evident that the love of Jesus Christ cannot 
exist at the same time with a vice so opposed to it. 
How can our blessed Saviour, who would have the first 
of the beatitudes, the foundation of the spiritual life, 



persons so wise 




jgular, so circum- 



Digitized by 



Google 



CHAPTER II. 



73 



and the first step to be taken in the path of virtue, to 
be that spirit of humility which He Himself has chosen, 
in preference to all the other virtues as His own special 
characteristic ; — how can He be greatly loved by those 
who so little resemble Him ? This sincere humility of 
mind and heart is the distinctive character of Jesus 
Christ. It is impossible, then, to be animated by His 
spirit, and to dwell in His Heart, unless we are truly 
animated by this spirit of humility. > 

IV. Fourth Obstacle.— ^ Some Unmortified Passion. 

The fourth obstacle, and the fourth source of those 
defects which hinder and destroy the love of Jesus 
Christ, and consequently the devotion to His Sacred 
Heart, are certain unmortified passions to which we are 
attached, and which, sooner or later, are the fatal cause 
of some great misfortune. 

The greater number of persons who wish to give 
themselves to God, and who consequently declare a 
mortal war against all vices, proceed in this war some- 
thing in the same way as Saul did, in the war he 
undertook by the order of God against Amalech — Vade, 
percute Amalech, et demolire universa ejus ; non parcas ei, 
et non concupiscas ex rebus ipsius aliquid. Now, therefore, 
go and smite Amalech, and utterly destroy all that he hath ; 
spare him not, nor covet anything that is his (1 Kings xv. 
3). Almighty God had ordered Saul to exterminate all 
the Amalekites, and destroy whatever belonged to 
them, without sparing anything. Saul exterminated 
the people, but, moved with compassion, he pardoned 
the king, and reserved for sacrifice whatever he found 
most precious on the field : et pepercit Saul Agag . . . 
et universis quapulchra erant, nec voluerunt disperdere ea ; 
quidquid vero vile fuit et reprobum, hoc demoliti sunt. 
And Saul spared Agag . . . and all that was beautiful, 
and would not destroy them, but everything that was vile 
and good for nothing, that they destroyed. The Lord hath 



Digitized by Google 



74 



SECOND PAET. 



rejected thee from being king. But this disobedience cost 
Saul his kingdom, and was the cause of his reprobation 
and ruin : abjecit te Dominus ne sis Bex. 

Many follow the example of Saul in the war they 
undertake against their vices. May God preserve 
them from a similar fate. We are well convinced that 
God wills that we should make a sacrifice to Him of 
all our passions, and that He cannot endure that we 
should spare any vice. But we consent to this only in 
appearance. We destroy, so to speak, all our enemies, 
but there is some predominant passion that we spare. 
There is always something particularly dear and precious 
that we do not touch. That we may deceive ourselves 
without scruple, we leave a place in our heart always 
with some good motive, for one of our enemies. We 
extinguish in ourselves the spirit of the world, but we 
like to see it still living in its followers. We dress 
ourselves with all modesty, but we wish a daughter to 
be attired in the extreme of unchristian fashions. We 
do not gamble, but we are recklessly extravagant in the 
entertainments which we give. We moderate our im- 
petuosity and our anger, but we spare a secret ambition 
and some secret jealousy which we cannot resolve to 
overcome. We mortify that constant dissipation which 
is so unbecoming in persons who make profession of 
loving Jesus Christ in a special manner, but we will not 
deprive ourselves of the liberty of spending whole hours 
in visits and useless conversations. Under the pretence 
that we must make ourselves agreeable to all, to gain 
all to Jesus Christ, and that we must make virtue easy, 
sweet, and amiable, we insensibly get into the habit of 
doing everything just like others, and reserve only the 
name and appearance of virtue. 

Others, a little more generous, break the strongest 
links that kept them attached to the world. They 
leave their parents and their property. They even give 
up their liberty in a certain way, and submit to the yoke 
of religious obedience. But they do not take pains to 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTEE II. 



75 



break the smaller links, that is to say, to free them- 
selves from a variety of little affections, which fail not 
to stop them, and retard their progress in the way of 
perfection. What does it matter, that the fetters which 
keep us bound to creatures are slight, if there are 
many of them ? A single chain, however small, suffices 
to hinder us from advancing a single step when we will 
not break it. 

Finally, there are some who are generous enough to 
resolve to overcome all. They even make some efforts 
to do so. But they do not touch their natural disposi- 
tion or that failing which suits their inclinations best. 
This one enemy left unconquered, this single passion 
not mortified, this single chain unbroken, makes them 
go on creeping all their lives, and hinders them from 
arriving at the high perfection to which they were 
called — pro eo ergo abjeczt te Dominua ne sis "Rex. The 
Lord hath rejected thee from being king. A small opening 
is enough to destroy a ship, and to bring to ruin in 
course of time the most splendid edifice. A spark 
suffices to cause a great conflagration. Death is often 
the consequence of a trifling sickness neglected. A 
single ill drawn stroke of the pencil is enough to dis- 
credit a picture, otherwise well executed. 

We are surprised sometimes to see persons who have 
grown old in exercises of piety, men of consummate 
spirituality and highly mortified, who still retain very 
great imperfections which they themselves condemn in 
others, and of which, however, they never correct them- 
selves. This arises from their familiarising themselves, 
as it were, with their own failings. They have spared 
them from their youth ; they allow their natural dispo- 
sition to act. They easily become impatient ; they con- 
tinually praise themselves always with some good 
motive, and under some grand pretext. They neglect 
to become perfect when they are young, and they, find 
themselves most imperfect when they are old. 



Digitized by Google 



76 



8EC0ND PART. 



Such are the great obstacles to the love of Jesus 
Christ, and consequently to the devotion to His Sacred 
Heart. Such are the sources of the many imperfec- 
tions that are noticed in persons who seem the most 
spiritual ; imperfections, however, which do great in- 
jury to true piety, by the false idea they give of devotion. 
True piety always condemns these defects. The true 
love of Jesus Christ cannot exist together with these 
imperfections, this secret pride, this self-love. The 
effects of these three fatal sources are not to be found 
in those who possess this true love. And yet, without 
this pure and true love of Jesus Christ, there is no 
solid devotion, no perfect virtue. 

" My God ! " exclaimed a great servant of God, 
" what confusion and disorder is this ? At one time 
we are cheerful, at another sad ; to-day we are kind to 
every one, to-morrow we are like a hedge-hog, that no 
one can touch without being pricked." This is a clear 
proof of a want of virtue. It is a sign that nature 
still reigns in us, that our passions are not mortified. 
A truly virtuous man is always the same. Is there no 
danger, if we sometimes do good, of our doing it rather 
through humour than from virtue ? 

CHAPTER nr. 

The means of overcoming the obstacles, that hinder us from 
gathering the fruit we ought, from the devotion to the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ. 

It is certain that tepidity, self-love, secret pride, or any 
other passion that we have not taken care to mortify, 
are the chief springs of our imperfections, and the 
greatest obstacles to our gathering the fruit we ought, 
from the devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ. 
We have only a weak and languishing charity. We 
cherish within us our most formidable enemies. With- 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER in. 



77 



out us are the devil -who tempts us, the world which 
attracts us, objects which dazzle us, occasions which 
surround us, examples which draw us away. If, then, 
we are not always on our guard, and do not keep the 
doors of our senses closed against all these enemies 
who besiege us, they will speedily make themselves 
masters of our heart. " It is extraordinary," says a 
great servant of God, " how many enemies we have to 
fight against. From the moment we form the resolu- 
tion of becoming saints, they seem to be all let loose : 
the devil with his artifices, nature with the resistance 
it makes to our good desires, the praises of the good, 
the scoffs of the wicked, the solicitations of the tepid, 
the example of those who pass for devout, but are not 
so. If God visit us, we have to fear vanity; if He 
withdraw Himself, timidity. Discouragement may 
succeed the greatest fervour. Our friends tempt us 
by means of the condescension which we show towards 
them : the indifferent by the fear we have of dis- 
pleasing them. Indiscretion is to be feared in fervour, 
sensuality in moderation, and self-love in everything. 
What then are we to do ? For sanctity does not consist 
in being faithful for a day or a year, but in persevering 
and advancing until death. We must make use of 
those means which all the Saints, together with Jesus 
Christ Himself, assure us to be most suitable for 
weakening and destroying that self-love and secret 
pride which are the source of all these impediments. 
These means are mortification and humility. We must 
resolve on one of two things, either never to have a 
perfect love for Jesus Christ, or to be truly humble and 
perfectly mortified. 

I. First Means.-— True Mortification. 

Mortification is so necessary for the perfect love of 
Jesus Christ, that it is the first lesson that Jesus 
Christ Himself gives to those who wish to be His 



Digitized by Google 



78 



SECOND PABT. 



disciples. Without it, we can have no hope of ever 
being disciples of Jesus Christ. If any man will come 
after Me, says our loving Saviour, let him deny himself, 
take up hie cross, and follow Me ; and whosoever doth not 
carry his cross, and hate his own life, cannot be My dis- 
ciple, and is not worthy of Me. For this reason all the 
Saints agree in considering that there is no stronger 
proof of real piety than perfect mortification. Is he a 
very mortified person ? asked St. Ignatius, when the 
virtue of some one was praised by others. He would 
give them to understand that true mortification is in- 
separable from true piety, not only because no virtue 
can long exist without constant and general mortifica- 
tion, but also, because, without mortification, there is no 
such thing as true virtue. 

There are two sorts of mortifications : one exterior, 
which consists in the maceration of the body ; the 
other interior, which is properly the mortification of 
the mind and heart. Both are necessary for attaining 
perfection. One cannot exist long without the other. 
Fasts, watchings, hair-shirts, and other bodily mortifi- 
cations are powerful means to become truly spiritual 
and truly perfect ; and when they are used with discre- 
tion, help marvellously to strengthen nature, always 
weak for good and prone to evil ; to repress the assaults 
and escape the snares of our common enemy, and finally 
to obtain from the Father of mercies, the helps that are 
necessary for all the just, and especially for beginners. 

It is true that sanctity does not consist in exterior 
penances, and that they are not incompatible with 
hypocrisy. But it is not so with interior mortification. 
This is always a mark of true piety. It is, therefore, 
still more necessary than exterior mortification, and no 
one can reasonably abstain from it. We must do our- 
selves this violence continually, in order to gain heaven. 
All are not able to fast, or to wear a hair-shirt, but there 
is no one who cannot be silent, at a time when passion 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER in. 



79 



moves him to answer, or vanity to speak. There is no 
one who cannot mortify his natural disposition, his 
desires, his passions. It is in this that interior mor- 
tification chiefly consists. By it we weaken our self- 
love, reduce it to reason, and free ourselves from our 
imperfections. It is in vain that we flatter ourselves 
we love Jesus Christ, if we are not mortified. All 
the sublimest sentiments of piety, all the practices 
of devotion are to be suspected, if not accompanied by 
this perfect mortification. We wonder to see ourselves 
so imperfect, and after so many practices of piety, so 
many communions, to feel the various passions that 
continually agitate our heart. Do we not see that it is 
the want of perfect mortification which is the source of 
all these disorders ? It is necessary, then, if we would 
weaken and destroy this self-love, by which all the pas- 
sions are fed, to resolve upon generous and constant 
mortification. 

It is not enough to mortify ourselves for a certain 
time, and in some things. We must, if possible, mor- 
tify ourselves in all things and at all times, though 
with prudence and discretion. A single irregular grati- 
fication which you allow to nature has more effect in 
making her haughty and rebellious, than a hundred 
victories that you may have gained over her will have 
in weakening her. A truce with enemies of this kind 
is a victory for them. My brethren, says St. Bernard, 
what is lopped off, sprouts again ; what is extinguished, 
rekindles ; what is slumbering, wakes up again. To 
preserve the interior spirit of devotion we must pre- 
vent our soul from diffusing itself abroad. We must 
surround it on all sides, as the Prophet says, with a 
hedge of thorns. Now this we neglect to do; and 
hence our tepidity, our relaxation, and all our indevo- 
tion. If we mortify nature in one thing, we imme- 
diately repay it by some other satisfaction which we 
allow it. If we are recollected in a retreat, as soon as 



Digitized by Google 



80 



SECOND FABT. 



it is over, we open all the doors of our senses to objects 
that will dissipate us. The exercise of this interior 
mortification, so habitual to all the Saints, is familiar 
to all those who have a true desire of perfection. We 
have but to attend to the suggestions of the Spirit of 
God. The love of Jesus Christ is so ingenious on this 
point, that the diligence and the methods of mortifica- 
tion, with which it at once inspires the most ignorant 
persons, surpass the ideas of the most learned, and 
may almost be called miraculous. There is nothing 
that does not afford them an opportunity of mortifying 
their natural inclinations. There is no time, or place, 
that does not seem suited to mortify themselves, with- 
out ever departing from the rules of real good sense. 
It suffices that they have a great wish to see or to 
speak, to oblige them to cast down their eyes, and be 
silent. The desire to hear news, or to know all that 
happens, is to them a constant motive for mortification. 
This mortification is the more meritorious in propor- 
tion, as it is less extraordinary, and has God for its 
sole witness. A happy remark, a witty pleasantry, 
may do us honour in society, but it may also form 
the subject of a pleasing sacrifice. There is scarcely 
an hour of the day which does not offer some op- 
portunity of mortification. Whether we are sitting 
or standing, we can easily find a less comfortable 
place or position, without anything appearing exte- 
riorily. If we are repeatedly interrupted in some very 
serious occupation, we can reply as often with as 
much mildness and civility as if we had not been 
occupied at all. The patience of a person of solid 
virtue, may find great exercise in the ill-temper of 
any one about him ; the imperfections of a servant, or 
the ingratitude of one who is under obligations 
to him. Finally, inconveniences of place, season, or 
persons, borne in such a manner, as if we did not 
perceive them, are, it is true, small opportunities of 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER III. 



81 



fying ourselves — but mortification in these little things 
is no little matter. It is of great merit; and it 
may be said that the greatest graces, and the most 
exalted sanctity, depend generally on the generosity 
which we show in mortifying ourselves in these little 
things. It is not a small mortification to omit none 
of the duties of a community, and to conform oneself 
in all things to community life, without having any 
regard to our own inclinations, our employments, or 
age. This kind of mortification is the more valuable 
in proportion, as it is less exposed to vanity, and more 
conformable to the spirit of Jesus Christ. 

But if we did not find in external things so many 
occasions for mortifying ourselves, they are always to 
be found within ourselves. We cannot be for a long 
time modest, recollected, reserved, without great mor- 
tication. Honesty, meekness and civility may be the 
effect of education, but they are generally the marks of 
one who is habitually mortified. Without this virtue 
how can we be in peace, and always the same, do 
always perfectly what we do, and be always content 
with what God wills ? 

II. — Second Means.— Sincere Humility. 

The second means is sincere humility. Jesus Christ, 
says St. Augustin, does not say to us, learn of Me to 
work miracles, but learn of Me, because I am meek 
and humble of heart, to give us to understand, that, 
without humility, there is no true piety. We are 
sufficiently convinced of the necessity of this virtue ; 
all the difficulty consists in knowing what is true 
humility. Many think they are truly humble, as soon 
as they have a low opinion of themselves. But they 
deceive themselves, if they are not at the same time 
well pleased, that others should entertain the same 
opinion of them. It is not enough that we acknow- 
ledge ourselves to possess no virtue or merit. We 

o 



Digitized by Google 



82 



SECOND PART. 



must believe it. We must be pleased that others 
believe it. The first step to be taken in gaining this 
virtue, is to beg it earnestly of God. The next is 
firmly to convince ourselves, by means of serious and 
frequent reflection on ourselves, of our poverty and our 
own imperfections. The remembrance of what we 
have been, and the thought of what we may be, serve 
greatly to humble us. The truly virtuous think little 
of others, and occupy themselves solely with their own 
imperfections. The truly humble are scandalized at 
nothing, because they know their own weakness so 
well. They see themselves so near the precipice, and 
they are so much afraid of falling, that they are not 
surprised if others fall. The less we speak of ourselves, 
the more closely we conform ourselves to true humility. 
Those affected discourses, by which we wish to make 
it appear that we have little esteem for ourselves, have 
no effect usually but to gain us praise. The most 
certain mark of sincere humility is to have a special 
love for those who despise us : never to avoid any 
humiliations that present themselves to us; not to 
take pleasure in vain thoughts and vain projects for 
the future, which only serve to nourish a secret pride 
within us; never to speak to our own advantage; 
never to complain and not to allow others to complain 
of anything Almighty God allows to happen to us ; to 
excuse the failings of our neighbour; never to be 
troubled at our own relapses ; to defer to others in all 
things .; never to undertake anything but with diffidence 
in ourselves, and to have little esteem for what we do. 
Finally, to pray much, and to speak little. 

Any one who is convinced that he is very miserable, 
is not offended if he is despised : he sees that it is only 
just. A humble man, whatever bad treatment he may 
receive, thinks that justice is done him. Men do not 
esteem me ; they are right, they agree in this with God, 
and with the Angels. Whoever has deserved hell, 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER III. 



83 



thinks that contempt is his due. It is not meant by 
this, that we are obliged to receive a humiliation with 
sensible pleasure. Contempt is naturally disagreeable. 
But not to complain, to be silent under contempt, to 
thank God for it, and to pray to Him for those whom 
He makes use of to humble us, whatever repugnance 
nature may feel in submitting, are certain marks of 
sincere humility, without which there is no virtue. 
We have enemies, say a St. Paul, within and without 
us, who spread snares for us on every side. The love 
of humility, of abjection, of a hidden and obscure life, 
is a powerful remedy against so many evils. There is 
no peace but in the forgetfulness of ourselves. If we 
wish to become perfect, we must resolve to forget even 
our own spiritual interests, and to seek only the pure 
glory of God. 

III. Third Means. — The joy and true sweetness which are 
inseparable from the exercise of true mortification and of 
sincere humility. 

There is no devotion, without universal, generous, 
and constant mortification. There is none without 
sincere humility. But is it possible to speak of humi- 
lity and continual mortification, without terrifying per- 
sons who perhaps have some desire to gain an ardent 
love of Jesus Christ? Do they not immediately tremble 
at the thought of so uncomfortable a condition ? 

Who can look upon a life full of crosses, without 
feeling horror? To thwart our natural inclinations in 
everything, to deny our senses every satisfaction that 
is not absolutely necessary, to live in retirement and 
silence, without seeking the esteem of men, taking 
pleasure in their praises, or feeling regret at their con- 
tempt, — is not this, we may say, to lead a very unhappy 
life ? All, however, who live in this manner, declare 
that they are perfectly happy. The world says that 
this kind of life is insupportable ; but Jesus Christ 

q 2 



Digitized by Google 



84 



SECOND PART. 



Himself says that it is sweet and easy, full of joy and 
consolation. The world — that is to say, those who 
know nothing ahout this life — say one thing ; and all 
who have experienced it, say quite the contrary. St. 
Francis of Sales calls this sort of life the sweetness of 
sweetnesses. St. Ephrem, whilst practising a most 
mortified life, cried out, full of consolation, " It is 
enough, my God, it is enough ! Do not load me with 
Thy benefits. Moderate Thy liberality, if Thou wouldst 
not have me die, for the ineffable sweetness which I 
taste in Thy service is enough to cause my death/' " I 
am in a country," says St. Francis Xavier, writing 
from Japan to his brethren in Europe, " where I am in 
want of all the conveniences of life. But nevertheless, 
I feel so much interior consolation, that there is danger 
of my losing my sight through weeping with joy." 
Can so many thousands of Saints, whom we acknow- 
ledge to have been so wise and so sincere, have agreed 
to say exactly opposite to what they thought and ex- 
perienced ? 

But if we are so unhappy, as worldly persons think, 
in this exercise of continual mortification, how is it 
that those we see to be most mortified are always the 
most contented ? How is it that we find no persons 
on earth perfectly contented, perfectly happy, but those 
who are most mortified ? If this mortified life does not 
itself produce this unalterable joy, by what artifice do 
these persons preserve themselves until death, in a 
sweetness and tranquillity which no misfortune of life 
can ever disturb ? If they merely feign it, how is it 
that persons of the world, who know so well the art of 
dissimulation, have never as yet been able to conceal 
their uneasiness and their regrets, though they pass 
the greater part of their life in pleasure and amuse- 
ment? Virtue alone, says St. Augustan, though it 
seems austere, gives true pleasure. There is no perfect 
felicity in this world, except for virtuous persons, wb.9 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER III. 



85 



seriously labour at their sanctification. Exempt as 
they are from the disturbance of those cruel passions 
which tyrannise over the wicked, they experience more 
sweetness in their life, and less regret. Perfectly sub- 
missive to God's will, they enjoy a calm and profound 
peace which the world cannot give. This sweet tran- 
quillity of conscience is the ordinary result of virtue. 
The more we belong to God, the more do we enjoy it. 
The more we keep back from God, the less do we 
participate in this sweetness. 

What might we not say of the secret unction by 
which Almighty God lightens the yoke of His law ; of 
those happy moments in which He makes Himself 
heard by just souls ; of that sweet hope, which makes 
them feel in anticipation the joys of heaven ; of those 
rays of light, which show them so clearly the vanity of 
the world ; of those tears of consolation, which they 
sometimes shed at the foot of the crucifix, when they 
experience a purer and more exquisite joy than the 
most delightful pleasures of the world can afford ? 
This joy and this interior sweetness, which surpasses 
all imagination, is a hidden mystery to tepid souls. It 
is for them an unknown language. But give me, says 
St. Augustin, a fervent soul, one truly humble and 
mortified, a heart full of the love of Jesus Christ ; such 
a one will understand what I say. " Dcl o/nuintem et 
sentiet quod dico" It is true, that to be perfect, it is 
not necessary to be altogether insensible to the mis- 
fortunes of life. Disasters may cause some agitation to 
the just, but they do not overpower him. He has 
always in his virtues a strong rock of support. In the 
broad way in which the imperfect walk, even though it 
had no crosses of its own, everything would contribute 
to raise them up around. Whereas, in the path followed 
by those who have an ardent love of Jesus Christ, 
whatever crosses there are, heaven and earth conspire, 
as it were, to sweeten them. The Son of God Himself 



Digitized by Google 



86 



SECOND PART. 



carries them with us, to lighten their weight. Finally, 
the mere thought of death is enough of itself to alarm 
the happiest worldlings, whereas it serves but to con- 
sole and rejoice the virtuous. Was there ever anyone 
at the point of death, at that moment when so correct 
a judgment is formed of everything, who was sorry for 
having practised mortification, or for having led a 
perfect life ? Or rather, is there anyone, on the con- 
trary, who has not felt a deep regret for not having 
done so ? 

Perfect mortification must assuredly have charms 
that we know not, because we are not perfectly mor- 
tified. Our weakness lets us do only enough to feel 
the difficulty, but not enough to taste the sweetness. 
It seems as though we mistrusted what is told us by 
the virtuous, and what Jesus Christ Himself promises 
us. We would have Him pay us in advance. We 
forget that in this, it is only the first step that is 
difficult. All the difficulty lies in resolving to mortify 
ourselves. Taste, says the Prophet, and see. In this 
matter, the eye is deceived; we must judge by the 
taste alone. Those who had seen the land of promise 
only from afar, were frightened, and said that it de- 
voured its inhabitants. But those who had been there, 
said quite the contrary, and declared that it was a land 
flowing with milk and honey. Let us make this perfect 
sacrifice for a fortnight, at least. A thing must be 
indeed of little value, if it is not worth the trial. If, 
after a fortnight of continual and perfect mortification, 
we do not taste that sweetness which others experience, 
I am content, said a great servant of God, that it 
should be said, that the life of those who truly love 
Jesus Christ is irksome, and that the yoke of our Lord 
is heavy. 

Is it not strange, that men should require so much 
to convince them that they can be happy in the exercise 
of constant mortification, when they see daily so many 



Digitized by Google 



GHAPTEB in. 



87 



persons pensive and uneasy amidst the greatest dissi- 
pation ? If there are sufferings which are unseen, is it 
impossible that there should he a hidden sweetness ? 
There is such, certainly, and it depends on ourselves 
to experience it 

Fr. la Colombiere had made a vow, with the leave of 
his superiors, to observe all his rules, and he had bound 
himself in particular to a continual mortification in all 
things. What will those to whom the three essential 
vows of religion seem an insupportable burden, think 
of this great servant of God ? Would they not consider 
him unhappy ? But see what he himself has written 
in his Spiritual Retreats, in which, as is commonly the 
practice of persons of solid virtue, who are resolved on 
making constant progress in the way of perfection, he 
has noted the sentiments given him by God, and the 
graces which He granted him, in order to remind him- 
self to thank Him for them, and to encourage himself 
to love Him more every day. 

" On the sixth day," he says, " making a considera- 
tion on the particular vow I have made, I was filled 
with gratitude to God, who has granted me the grace 
to make this vow. I had never had time to consider it 
thoroughly. I felt great joy in seeing myself bound 
thus by a thousand chains to do the will of God. The 
thought of this obligation is so far from alarming me, 
that it fills me with joy. It seems to me, that, in place 
of being a slave, I have entered into the kingdom of 
liberty and peace." 

" When I am quite alone," he says elsewhere, " I 
feel, by the infinite mercy of God, a liberty of heart 
that causes me incomparable joy. I feel myself at- 
tached to nothing, at least at the time. This does not 
hinder me from feeling every day the emotions of almost 
all the passions. But a moment's reflection serves to 
calm them. 

"I have often felt great interior joy in the thought 



Digitized by Google 



88 



SECOND PART. 



that I was in God's service. I have felt that this was 
worth more than all the favour of kings. The occupa- 
tions of worldly persons appeared to me most contemp- 
tible, compared with what is done for God. I feel 
myself exalted above all the kings of the earth by the 
honour of belonging to God. 

" I feel continually a greater desire to apply to the 
observance of my rules. I feel the greatest delight in 
practising them. The more exact I am in them, the 
more I seem to enter into perfect liberty. It is certain 
that this does not cause me any uneasiness. On the 
contrary, this yoke makes me, as it were, much lighter. 
I look on this as the greatest grace I have ever received 
in my life." 

It cannot be doubted that this great servant of God 
practised continual mortification in all things after 
making an express vow to do so. Thus he was seen 
in his last illness, when his infirmity would allow him 
to leave his bed, passing many hours of the day on a 
seat without any kind of support, persevering in this 
manner until death in the practice of universal morti- 
fication. This mortified life filled him with such con- 
solation and so great interior joy. that he confesses that 
it may indeed be felt, but cannot possibly be described, 

" The sight of Jesus Christ," he says, " makes the 
cross so pleasant to me, that it seems as if I could not 
be happy without it. I look with respect on those 
whom God visits with humiliations and adversities, of 
what kind soever they be. They are without doubt 
His favourites. To humble myself I have only to 
compare myself with them whilst I am in prosperity." 

" The following words," he continues, " never come 
into my mind, but light, peace, liberty, meekness, and 
love enter in, as it seems to me, at the same time with 
them : ' Simplicity,' ' confidence/ ' humility/ ' self- 
abandonment,' ' absence of all reserve/ 1 the will of 
God/ < my rules.' " 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



89 



The experience of this great servant of God shows 
us, that not only have the Saints who have preceded 
us found so much sweetness in the exercise of universal 
and constant mortification, but that even those with 
whom we live experience the same, as soon as they 
have the generosity to mortify themselves continually. 



CHAPTER IV. 

The particular means of acquiring this perfect love of Jesus 
Christ, and this tender devotion to His Sacred Heart. 

First Means.— Prayer. 

Besides the obstacles that we must avoid, and the dis- 
positions in which we must find ourselves, in order to 
acquire this perfect love of Jesus Christ, and this tender 
devotion to His Sacred Heart, it is well to suggest here 
the means that are most appropriate for this end. 

Now, the first means to obtain this ardent love of 
Jesus Christ, and this tender devotion to His Sacred 
Heart, is Prayer. We may well wonder that Christians 
are not, as it were, all powerful ; that they have not all 
they desire, since they have an infallible means of 
obtaining all they ask, and this means consists only in 
asking. 

There is nothing to which Jesus Christ has so 
solemnly and so repeatedly bound Himself as to hear 
our prayers. But of all prayers there can be none more 
pleasing to Him than that by which we ask Him for 
His love. He has strictly bound Himself to grant this 
love to all who should ask Him for it. But we may add, 
that even though He had not engaged Himself to it, the 
request itself would oblige Him to it. 

Jesus Christ has done all that we can imagine, nay 
more, to oblige us to love Him. It rests with Him to 
give us this love. Who will dare believe that He will 



Digitized by Google 



00 



SECOND PAET. 



refuse it to us if we ask Him for it ? But our esteem 
for this love must be indeed small, since we trouble 
ourselves so little about it, and ask for it so seldom. 
You wonder that you have not an ardent love for Jesus 
Christ, though this love is so just and so conformable 
to reason. There would be greater reason for astonish- 
ment if you did love Him, seeing that this love is the 
greatest of all His gifts, and that yet you do not even 
condescend to ask it. Of all the means of obtaining 
the love of Jesus Christ, there is none more efficacious 
than prayer. There is none more easy. For who can 
excuse himself from praying ? Still there is none, as 
it appears, that is more neglected. It might be said, 
that the most powerful motive by which Jesus Christ 
seeks to oblige us to make use of this means keeps us 
from it. Credits, quia accipietis. Be sure that you will 
be heard. But, my God, is not this the very thing 
that is dreaded ? " Timebam, ne me cito exaudires." 
" I was afraid that you would hear my prayer too soon" 
(St* Aug. Confess., book i.). We fear, unhappy as we 
are, that didst Thou but once hear us, Thy love would 
induce us to become more virtuous, more recollected, 
more devout, and more holy than we wish to be. We 
fear that if we had an ardent love for Thee, we should 
feel nothing but disgust for all that we have loved, and 
that we still love. In a word, we seem to fear that we 
shall not be able to help loving Thee. But regard not, 
oh my Saviour, these sentiments that arise within us, 
and which we detest as soon as we perceive them. 
Give us only Thy love with thy grace, and we shall be 
rich enough. How soon shall we, disgusted with every- 
thing else, if, opening to us Thy Sacred Heart, Thou 
allowest us but once to taste the sweetness that is ex- 
perienced in loving Thee. Let us pray and often ask 



and constantly without obtaining it. We fear, perhaps, 
to be importunate or excessive in our requests, to offend 



for this love. It i 




possible to ask for it earnestly 



Digitized by 



Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



01 



Jesus Christ by our indiscretion or our importunity. 
But, on the contrary, the reason why we obtain so little 
from God is because we do not ask much. We are 
too limited in our desires, and too languid in our 
prayers. Jesus Christ has given us in the Gospel the 
parable of the man, who obtained what he asked, merely 
by his importunity, in order to teach us that, if we wish 
to obtain what we ask, we must become importunate. 
We obtain little, because we ask too little, and because 
we do not beg earnestly for the little we ask for. We 
must ask Him for nothing less than His love ; but 
it must be a tender, ardent, generous, and perfect love, 
and we must ask for it earnestly and with importunity. 
As He has so solemnly engaged Himself to refuse us 
nothing that we ask in His Name, He cannot refuse to 
hear us without breaking His promise. Most frequently 
we do not know what we ask. But we should do an 
injury to Jesus Christ, and falsify our own belief, if, 
when we ask Him for His love, we were to doubt His 
hearing us, more especially if we ask it with earnest- 
ness and sincerity. I believe, indeed, that Jesus Christ, 
to punish us, or to humble us, and in any case to in. 
crease our merit, will leave us certain defects and im* 
perfections, from which we entreat Him to deliver us. 
But no one will ever persuade me that, after we have 
asked Him sincerely and earnestly for an ardent love of 
Him, He will refuse it to us. On the contrary, He will 
grant us more than we asked. Thou hast brought this 
divine fire on earth, oh Lord, and what dost Thou desire 
but that it be enkindled ? Ignem veni mittere in teiram, 
et quid voh, nisi ut accendatur ? (Luke xii.) With whom 
does it rest wholly to inflame me with it ? Give me* 
then, if it please Thee, give me Thy love* oh Lord. 
This shall be in future my constant prayer. I will 
make it morning and night, when at rest and when 
at work. I will make it every hour, and will never 
cease to say : Give me but Thy love, oh Lord, 



Digitized by Google 



92 



SECOND PART. 



with Tiiy grace, and I am rich enough ; I ask no 
more. 

II. Second Means. — Frequent Communion. 

The second means is the frequent use of the Sacra- 
ments, and frequent Communion. It is enough to know 
what Holy Communion is, to understand that there is 
no more certain means of becoming inflamed with love 
for Jesus Christ than to communicate frequently. It is 
not possible, says the Wise Man, to carry fire in one's 
bosom, and not be set on fire by it. Divine love has 
enkindled a furnace, so to speak, on our Altars in the 
adorable Eucharist. It is by approaching to this sacred 
fire that all the Saints have been inflamed with a most 
ardent and tender love for Jesus Christ. The love 
which burned within them after Communion appeared 
even in their countenance. How often have they been 
forced, in the depth of winter, to seek the cool air in 
order to moderate the ardour of divine love? The 
name or the picture of Jesus Christ was enough to 
make them fall into raptures and ecstacies. It cannot 
be doubted that the great love which the first faithful 
had for Jesus Christ was the effect of Holy Com- 
munion, which they received daily. All who render 
themselves worthy, by the innocence of their life and 
the exercise of true piety, to communicate frequently, 
experience still every day, in this point, the admirable 
effects of frequent Communion. They love Jesus Christ 
more and more. Their love increases in proportion as 
they nourish themselves more frequently with this 
Bread of Angels. So far are they from becoming dis- 
gusted with the frequent use of it, that, on the con- 
trary, their hunger sensibly increases, as the love they 
have for Jesus Christ grows more ardent. 

All the other Sacraments are effects of the love 
which the Son of God has for men. There is not one 
that is not capable of instilling into our hearts a true 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



93 



love for our divine Saviour. But the Sacrament of 
the Altar, says St. Bernard, is the love of loves. 
Sacramentum Altaris est amor amorum. It is the 
effect of the greatest love, that Jesus Christ can have 
for man; and at the same time, the most fruitful 
source of the tender and ardent love that men ought to 
have for Jesus Christ. Everything in this mystery 
contributes to inspire and increase this ardent love: 
the gift, the manner of giving it, and the end for which 
it is given. Jesus Christ gives us therein His adorable 
Body, and His precious Blood, to be our food. What 
shall have power to light up this divine fire in the 
hearts of men, if this heavenly food cannot do it? 
But the loving manner in which Jesus Christ makes 
us this gift obliges us less powerfully to love Him. 
Our Divine Saviour, the expected of the people of 
Israel, the desired of nations, the desire of the eternal 
hills, allowed His coming into the world to be wished 
for, for so many thousand years. But here He Him- 
self asks men, entreats of them, and even does violence 
to them to make them receive Him. Oblige them, 
says He, in the Gospel, oblige them to partake of the 
banquet that I have prepared for them : compeUe intrare. 
Love is impatient. It is an enemy of delay. It does 
not know what it is to hesitate or to be cautious. 
What has our loving Saviour in view, in so much 
earnestness? He desires to be loved by men. He 
gives them His Body and Blood to gain their hearts. 
He makes Himself their food only to gain possession 
of their heart, to rob them of it, without their being, 
so to say, able to prevent it. The chief intention you 
should have in communicating, says St. Francis of 
Sales (Introduction to a Devout Life, part ii. ch. 2), 
should be to increase and strengthen yourself in the 
love of God, for you ought to receive through love what 
love alone gives you. " Nowhere," continues this 
great Saint, is our Saviour more loving or more tender 



Digitized by Google 



04 



SECOND PABT. 



than here. He here annihilates Himself, as it were, 
and becomes our food, in order to regenerate our souls, 
by uniting us most closely to Himself. 

We look with admiration on the fervour of those 
pure souls, who never approach the Altars, without 
feeling a sensible increase of love for Jesus Christ, and 
being wholly inflamed with it* But it is far more 
marvellous that Communions should be so frequent, 
and yet these marvels of so rare an occurrence. Your 
sins, your relapses, your weaknesses, give you un- 
easiness. You wish to correct yourself, to overcome 
that repugnance, that tepidity, to break that link which 
is the only thing that keeps you back in the path of 
piety. You wish to have an ardent love for Jesus 
Christ. You allow that only those who love Him per* 
fectly are perfectly happy ; and, yet, after so very many 
Communions, you are still so imperfect, so tepid, you 
have no greater love for Jesus Christ 

For a year, for ten years perhaps, you have said 
Mass every day. You have received the Body and 
Blood of Jesus Christ more than three thousand times 
in your life ; and yet, for a year, for ten years, you 
have been fighting against some imagination, some 
fancy, you say, which hinders you from belonging en- 
tirely to God, and from tasting that peace and sweet- 
ness which are enjoyed in His service. Perhaps even 
your love for Jesus Christ is less. " Ah ! my God," 
exclaimed a great servant of God, " are they heretics 
or infidels that speak thus " (Fr. la Colombiere, Keflex. 
Chret). How is it possible that a Christian who feeds 
so often on the Body of Jesus Christ should desire 
anything in vain ? Who will ever believe that a God, 
offered as the price of the graces that are sought, will 
not be able to obtain them ? That Jesus Christ, who 
has instituted this mystery only in order that He may 

* This extraordinary ardour of divine love is marvellous only 
because it is so rare. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



be loved, will refuse His love to those to whom He 
gives Himself without reserve or restriction ! If, then, 
unhappily we find that by communicating every week, 
or even oftener, or by celebrating Mass dally, we derive 
no profit from this adorable Sacrament, do not amend, 
misuse Holy Communion, do not love Jesus Christ 
more, always feel the same tepidity and weaknesses, are 
we therefore to leave off Communion ? Must we give 
up saying Mass daily? No; but we must regulate 
our life and free ourselves from the vices and failings 
that hinder us from profiting by it The evil does not 
spring from communicating too frequently, but from * 
communicating ill. Suppose that no sort of food did 
you good, because you took it when you should not, 
what would you do in such a case ? Would you abstain 
altogether from eating, or would you adopt every ne- 
cessary precaution in order to derive benefit from what 
you eat ? Suppose that some one formed the extra- 
ordinary resolution of preventing the food which he 
took at his meals from digesting in his stomach. He 
falls ill ; the physicians are consulted. Will any one 
of them be found to advise that the sick man take no 
more food ? He must eat ; but he must do it with the 
necessary precautions. He must be less indiscreet 
and imprudent. If he did not eat, the food would not 
indeed corrupt in his stomach, it is true ; but he would 
die of weakness. This imprudent and culpable reso- 
lution would not hinder digestion, but it would soon 
exhaust the remains of his strength, and you would 
soon see him fall in the course of twenty-four hours 
into a mortal weakness. He would not die of indiges- 
tion, but of hunger. In a word, it would be folly to 
take from him what supports his life, in order to 
deliver him from what makes him ill. It is easy to 
apply this example to those who do not draw any profit 
from Communion. These persons have great reason 
to fear that they are ill-directed, that their conscience 



Digitized by Google 



96 



SECOND PAET. 



is in a bad state, that their faith is too weak, and that 
their confessions are without sincerity, without sorrow, 
or without resolution of amendment. If you are ill- 
disposed, correct yourself at once, in order that you may 
communicate often .If you are imperfect, communicate 
often, in order that you may amend. The Son of God 
calls this adorable mystery our daily bread, to show 
what frequent use we should make of it He calls the 
poor and the blind to His banquet, in order to teach 
us that, however poor we may be, and whatever in- 
firmities we labour under, if we be still living, we must 
9 have no difficulty in eating this bread of life. 

The little fruit that the greater number of persons, 
especially Priests, draw from frequent Communion, 
gives rise sometimes to a doubt, whether it be advisable 
to communicate so frequently. But this doubt cannot 
be better answered than by quoting here what St. 
Francis of Sales has said on this subject. 

" I do not wish," says the Saint (Introd. to a Devout 
Life, pt. ii. ch. 20), " either to blame or to praise those 
who, not being Priests, communicate every day. But I 
advise all, and exhort them as earnestly as I can, to 
communicate every eight days, provided they have no 
affection to sin." These are the very words of St. 
Augustin, he continues. He neither praises nor blames 
absolutely those who communicate every day, but leaves 
the matter to the prudence of the director. For as the 
disposition necessary for communicating so frequently 
is so very rare, it is not well to advise it generally. 
But inasmuch as this disposition, however rare, may 
be found in many persons of solid virtue, it is not well 
on the other hand to forbid it generally to all. 

As it would be imprudence to recommend so frequent 
a use of the holy Eucharist to all indifferently, so it 
would be no less imprudence to blame those who make 
frequent use of it, by the advice of a wise director. 
The answer of St. Catherine of Sienna, on this subject, 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTEB IV. 



97 



is to the purpose. You teH me that I ought not to 
communicate so often, because St. Augustin neither 
praises nor blames those who do so every day. Since 
St. Augustin, she answers, does not blame it, do not 
do so yourself. You see Philothea, that St Augustin 
exhorts and strongly recommends to communicate every 
Sunday. Do so then, as far as you can. For since, 
as I suppose, you have no affection either to mortal or 
venial sin, you have the disposition required by St. 
Augustin. Nay, you have more; for not only have 
you no affection for sinning, but you have no affection 
for sin. You should therefore communicate every 
Sunday, and even oftener, if your spiritual Father 
judge it proper. 

If worldly persons, adds the Saint, in the following 
chapter (Int. to a Devout Life, pt. ii. ch. 21.) should 
ask you why you communicate so frequently, tell them 
it is to learn to love God, to purify yourself from your 
imperfections, to free yourself from your miseries, to 
console yourself in your afflictions, to gain strength in 
your weaknesses. Tell them that two kinds of persons 
should communicate frequently; the perfect, because 
being well disposed, they would do wrong not to ap- 
proach the source of perfection and sanctity, and the 
imperfect, in order that they may amend and become 
perfect ; the strong, that they may not become weak, 
and the weak that they may become strong ; the sick 
in order that they may be cured, and those who are 
well that they may not become ill. That, as regards 
yourself, as you are imperfect, weak and infirm, you. 
require frequently to communicate with Him who is 
your perfection, your strength, your medicine. Tell 
them, that persons in the world who have not much to 
do, should do so no less frequently, because they need 
greater helps, and that those who labour much and 
undergo great fatigue, should take solid food and eat 
frequently. Tell them that you communicate often in 

H 



Digitized by Google 



98 



SECOND PART. 



order to learn to do it well, for what we seldom do, we 
never do well. 

Communicate often, Philothea, and as often as you 
can with the advice of your director. Hares become 
white in our mountains during winter, from seeing and 
eating nothing but snow. So, by adoring and receiving 
Him Who is beauty, goodness, and purity Itself, in this 
august Sacrament, you will be insensibly purified from 
your sins, and become better and more pure every day. 

This is the advice St. Francis of Sales gives to all 
those who have a horror for every kind of mortal sin, 
and a real desire of securing their salvation. It is 
true that the desire to communicate is ordinarily found 
in all who have a lively faith and who really love Jesus 
Christ ; and, on the contrary, we too often experience 
that in proportion as we mix with the world, and as the 
love of Jesus Christ grows cold within us, we feel the 
greater difficulty in communicating. It is superfluous, 
therefore, to preach to the wicked, that they must 
abstain from Communion. They are too ready to do it 
of themselves. We never find that souls, corrupted by 
vice and immersed in it, hunger after this heavenly 
food, which forms the delight of pure souls and of all 
who love Jesus Christ. 

III. Third Means. — Visits to the Blessed Sacrament. 

The third means is often to visit the Blessed Sacra- 
ment. Friendship is kept up and increased among 
men by visits and frequent conversations. It is by this 
means, also, that we shall continually increase in an 
ardent love for Jesus Christ As He dwells on our 
Altars in order that He may be constantly with us, 
what must be His sentiments regarding those whom 
He rarely sees in His presence. It seems as if nothing 
gained His Heart more completely than these frequent 
adorations and visits. It is at these times that He 
usually bestows His gifts in greater abundance, and it 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



99 



may be said, that of all the favours He then grants, 
the most ordinary is the grace of His love. 

There are visits of civility, and there are visits also 
of pure friendship. To fail in the first would be a 
fault, but it is only during the latter that His special 
favours are usually granted. The greater feasts, the 
time of Mass and of Divine office, are in respect of 
Jesus Christ the same thing as visits of duty and 
civility to great persons. We should be noticed, or 
even punished, if we were not there with* the crowd. 
But the visits that are made at certain hours of the 
day, at which Jesus Christ is not generally visited, 
but, on the contrary, forgotten by the greater number, 
are visits of friendship. It is at this time, more than 
any other, that Jesus Christ converses familiarly, so to 
speak, with His favourites, and He showers upon them 
the treasures of His graces and inflames them with 
His love. Whether it be that the indifference of those 
who then forget Him, renders the fidelity of those who 
visit Him more precious, all the Saints have experienced 
that there is no more infallible means of soon obtaining 
a great love of Jesus Christ, than frequently to visit Him 
in the Churches, particularly at certain hours of the 
day when He is so little honoured and so rarely visited. 
In the third part will be found the manner of making 
these visits, and the reason is explained why those who 
make them often derive so little profit from them. We 
will here only observe, that when we make them in 
such a manner as if we really believed that it is Jesus 
Christ Whom we are visiting, they are an infallible 
means of obtaining, in a short time, a perfect love for 
Jesus Christ. 

IV. Fourth Means. — Fidelity in accomplishing with 
exactness some practices of this devotion. 

The fourth means is, fidelity in accomplishing with 
exactness some little practices which Jesus Christ has 

h 2 



Digitized by Google 



100 



SECOND PART. 



declared to be very pleasing to Him, and well suited to 
honour His Sacred Heart, and inflame us, in a short 
time, with an ardent love of Him. These practices 
consist in some visits to the Blessed Sacrament, certain 
prayers, and some Communions, more frequent and more 
devout ; and all this from certain motives which will be 
explained in the first Chapter of the Third Part. 

There are some persons who, from a false idea of 
virtue, treat as frivolous all practices of devotion that 
seem to them too easy, and have little esteem for what- 
ever does not give them an opportunity of distinguish- 
ing 'themselves. Such persons will not feel much 
fervour, perhaps, in regard of these practices, because 
they contain nothing striking or very extraordinary. 
They will imagine, that what every one can do, cannot 
be so very effectual a means of becoming what in effect 
few are. But, without examining here the true cause of 
this illusion, might we not make them the same answer 
which was made to Naaman, whofce ideas were somewhat 
similar to these ? Even though something very diffi- 
cult were proposed to you in order to obtain so great a 
grace, you ought not to refuse to do it. With how 
much greater reason, then, ought you to try the efficacy 
of the means proposed to you, since it costs you so little. 

It is necessary, indeed, that there should be perse- 
verance and exactness in perfectly accomplishing what 
is enjoined in these little practices. This fidelity is 
usually what is most grateful to God and most meri- 
torious in any devotional exercises. It is always the 
least suspicious sign of sincere love. It would be much 
better to do less and to be more constant. Our good 
works are perfect in proportion as they are less accom- 
panied by self-will. Now, those who continually change 
their practices of devotion, or the time of these practices, 
are certainly persons who act only by the movement of 
their own will. For what other motive can they have 
in making these changes ? 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTEB IV. 



101 



In perseverance, then, properly consists that generous 
fidelity which is the most certain proof of a great love 
for Jesus Christ. If we consider seriously what we do 
for God, we shall see, that however great may he our 
lahour, we do hut very little. In another sense, however, it 
may he truly said, that it is no little matter to persevere 
steadily, without taking notice of the disposition we 
happen to be in, or of our feelings at the time, or of 
numberless other specious pretexts which present them- 
selves every day, and which our natural inconsistency 
represents to us as lawful reasons for changing, or at 
least interrupting, our practices of devotion. To be 
always constant, whether we be sad or joyous, in tran- 
quillity or fatigued, in peace or in a tumult, and to 
fulfil steadily for Jesus Christ certain obligations which 
the love and gratitude we wish to show Him impose on 
us, is to be truly faithful to Him, and to have a true 
love for Jesus Christ. 

V. Fifth Means. — A tender devotion towards the 
Blessed Virgin* 

The fifth means for gaining quickly an ardent love 
for Jesus Christ is to have a tender devotion to the 
Blessed Virgin, who has so absolute a power over the 
Sacred Heart of her Son. It cannot be doubted but 
that the Blessed Virgin is of all creatures the one who 
has had the greatest love for Jesus Christ, has been 
most loved by Him, and has had also the most ardent 
desire that He should be perfectly loved. She is the 
Mother of perfect love : " Mater pvlehra dilectionis." 
To her we must have recourse, if we would be inflamed 
with it. The Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary are too 
much alike, and too closely united, for it to be possible 
that we should have an entrance into one and not gain 
an entrance into the other ; with this difference, how- 
ever, that the Heart of Jesus admits only souls of the 
greatest purity, whereas the Heart of Mary purifies 



Digitized by Google 



102 



SECOND PART. 



such as are not so by the graces which she obtains 
for them, and makes them fit to be received into the 
Heart of Jesus. 

Though all the other means of acquiring an ardent 
love of Jesus Christ are easy and efficacious, this ap- 
pears the easiest for many. Few have all the disposi- 
tions necessary for being inflamed with divine love. But 
there are few who cannot very easily obtain them by 
means of the Blessed Virgin. Sinners even ought not 
to despair. Mary is the hope of sinners ; Mary is the 
refuge of all the miserable (St. Aug. serm. xviii. on the 
Saints ; St. Ephraim, Praises of the B.V.) ; she is the 
bulwark of help for all. Jesus Christ easily grants to 
her what we are unworthy to receive — " Quia indignus 
eras cui donaret," says St. Bernard (Serm. iii., Vig. of 
Nativity), " datum est Mariae ut per illam acciperes 
quidquid haberes." He has established her as the dis- 
pensatrix of His graces, and has resolved to grant none 
that should not pass through her hands : " Nihil nos 
Deus habere voluit, quod per manus Marise non tran- 
siret." Let us have a tender love for the Mother, and 
we shall soon be inflamed with an ardent love for the 
Son. It is a mark that we do not desire the love of the 
Son, when we do not feel a great tenderness for the 
Mother. Without this great tenderness for the Blessed 
Virgin, we can never hope to have an entrance into the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ. It has been observed 
that there has never been any one, who felt only in- 
difference for the Blessed Virgin, who had not at the 
same time an aversion for Jesus Christ. Indeed, it is 
from the aversion such persons have for Jesus Christ, 
that their indifference and aversion for the Blessed 
Virgin arises. " Qvimeodit" said the Son of God, " et 
Patrem meum odit ; he that hateth Me, hateth My Father 
also" For the same reason it may be said, that there 
never was a heretic in the world that was not an enemy 
of the Blessed Virgin, because there has never been 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



103 



one that has not hated Jesus Christ. All the works 
composed by them tend no less to extinguish the love 
of the Mother than that of the Son. There has never 
been one of these secret enemies of Jesus Christ, occu- 
pied as they are in destroying the means most suited 
to make us love Him, who has inspired us with devo- 
tion towards the Blessed Virgin, or rather who has not 
sought, by every possible means, to extinguish in the 
hearts of the faithful so just and so solid a devotion. 

This has been remarked by one of the most zealous 
and distinguished prelates of these times, the illustrious 
Archbishop of Malmes, in his admirable Pastoral Letter, 
on which Pope Innocent XII. has pronounced so high 
an eulogium, in the Brief which he wrote to this 
Prelate. This Pastoral Letter is full of the spirit and 
zeal which animated St Charles Borromeo and St. 
Francis of Sales. It will rank as a masterpiece of this 
style of writing, whether we consider the beautiful 
instructions it contains, the sound morality which 
pervades it, or the -solidity of the doctrine which it 
inculcates. Let us hear in what terms this great 
Prelate expresses himself, regarding the false zeal of 
those who, so far from urging all the faithful to devo- 
tion towards the Blessed Virgin, seem even to do all in 
their power to discredit it. 

" It scandalizes Catholics," he says, " in the highest 
degree, to perceive that discredit is covertly thrown 
upon the devotion which they have imbibed with their 
mother's milk, and which has been so frequently and 
so earnestly recommended to them by those who have 
had the care of their instruction. It scandalizes them 
to see that images are no longer valued ; that pil- 
grimages of devotion are made a jest of, and that the 
insipid and unchristian jests of Erasmus are used for 
this purpose ; that in private conversations, and even 
in anonymous libels, the Sodalities instituted in honour 
of the Blessed Virgin are decried, whilst all who are 



Digitized by Google 



104 



SECOND PART. 



faithful to the pious and holy practices of their fore- 
fathers are taking up their defence, and desire that 
they should be again now, as in the time of their 
ancestors, the mark by which a Catholic is recognized 
and distinguished from a heretic." 

And elsewhere, "We recommend earnestly to all," 
he says, " devotion towards the Blessed Virgin. We 
desire that you employ your efforts to increase this 
devotion and make it flourish more and more amongst 
the Faithful ; that her pictures be visited with devo- 
tion, especially those at which miracles are wrought ; 
that they be carried in procession, as is customary ; 
that wax candles be lighted, Hymns and Litanies sung, 
and devotions performed before her statues ; that con- 
gregations and confraternities erected in her honour be 
spoken of with respect, as also the privileges and 
immunities granted by the Pontiffs to them ; that those 
who are not yet admitted be invited to join them ; that 
they be instituted in places where they do not exist, 
and re-established where they have been abolished ; 
that it be known, that to injure any one of these objects 
is to wound us most deeply ; how much more to cen- 
sure or destroy them. 

" We inherit from our ancestors these tender senti- 
ments of piety towards the Blessed Virgin. In spite of 
the rage of the heretics who surround us, we have 
happily preserved them. I desire with all my heart, 
that they should strike root more and more deeply in 
the hearts of the faithful. We feel urged to this by 
the advice and example of many holy personages, 
whom it is not necessary to particularize here. We 
may say, that all who have distinguished themselves in 
past ages by extraordinary sanctity, have given, in 
their lives, manifest marks of this devotion towards the 
Blessed Virgin. 

" Nor need we in this matter give ear to the vain 
scruples of heretics, and other enemies of Mary's honour, 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



105 



■who pretend that the respect shown to the Mother 
wounds the rights of the Son. The faithful are not so 
ill-instructed, as not to know what they owe to the Son, 
and that it is only in consideration of Him that honour 

is shown to the Mother All agree, that it is for 

the love of the Son that we honour the Mother, <or 
rather, that in the Mother we honour the Son, who, on 
His part, will visit with rigorous vengeance all that 
wounds the honour of His Mother. The Saints often 
tell us this, and the deplorable fall of some Christians 
clearly proves it to us. No sooner does a Christian 
relax in devotion towards the Mother, than devotion 
towards the Son insensibly decays, and becomes at last 
wholly extinct. 

" The zeal of St. Charles Borromeo in extending the 
devotion to the Blessed Virgin, the decrees he has 
made in her honour, are seen in the various Councils 
held by his care and authority at Milan. For there is 
hardly one, in which this virtuous Prelate does not 
manifestly show by words, and solid and lasting monu- 
ments, his ardent affection towards the Queen of 
Heaven. 

" The works of the holy Bishop of Geneva are full of 
the same sentiments ; and his life is replete with 
actions that attest the same devotion. He glories, in 
one place, that he belongs, as did almost the whole 
city, to the Confraternity of the Holy Rosary. I say 
nothing of St. Anselm, of St. Bernard, of St. Norbert. 
Let Pastors take these Saints as their models, and 
propose them to their flocks as excellent examples for 
imitation " 

It is rare indeed to meet with persons wanting in 
tenderness for the Blessed Virgin, and in an inclination 
towards that love which we should have for Mary, and 
that singular veneration which we owe her. We may 
say, that devotion to the Blessed Virgin Mary is uni- 
versal in our days. It is certain that devotion to the 



Digitized by Google 



106 



SECOND PAET. 



Mother will never be disparaged, but by the enemies of 
her Son. As for us, who desire to love her Son most 
ardently, we will neglect nothing that will help us to 
love the Mother tenderly; and let us be convinced that 
it is only by means of the Mother that we can find easy 
access to Jesus Christ, and be received into His Sacred 
Heart. 

For the same reason, we ought also to have a special 
devotion towards the Holy Family — St Joseph, St. 
Anne, and St. Joachim. For, as they loved Jesus 
Christ more ardently and more tenderly than others, 
they may be of greater use to us, in obtaining for us 
this love of tenderness, and procuring for us an entrance 
into that Sacred Heart, over which they exercise so 
great an authority. 

VI. Sixth Means. — A special devotion to St. Aloysim 
Gonzaga. 

The sixth means that we propose, and which Almighty 
God has already shown, by evident marks, to be most 
useful in obtaining a tender love for our Lord Jesus 
Christ, is devotion to St. Aloysius Gonzaga, of the 
Society of Jesus ; more illustrious still for his innocence 
and the sublime perfection of his life, than for the con- 
spicuous position which his rank in the world had 
given him. 

It is certain, that in heaven the Saints interest them- 
selves greatly, for all those who love and specially 
honour them on earth. The most ordinary grace which 
they obtain for them, is the virtue in which they them- 
selves have excelled, and which was in some degree 
their characteristic. This is what our Saint used to 
say, as was found written after his death : — " As men 
on earth are naturally more inclined to oblige those 
who have the same inclinations with themselves, Iso, in 
Heaven, the Blessed, who have excelled in some par- 
ticular virtue, are pleased to employ their credit with 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



107 



God, in favour of those who have a particular attraction 
for the same virtue, and who labour in earnest to 

acquire it " 

Now, as the devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, 
in the exercise of an interior life, and continual union 
with God, was the distinguishing characteristic of St. 
Aloysius Gonzaga, it cannot be doubted but that he 
interests himself in a particular manner for those who 
have this devotion greatly at heart. Many persons 
have happily experienced the powerful effects of his 
intercession in this point. It might be said, that no 
one can be truly devout to him, without feeling at once 
a real tenderness for Jesus Christ. Devotion to him 
inspires a high esteem and love for the interior life. 
There seem to be few Saints whom we can propose 
more universally than St. Aloysius, to all sorts of per- 
sons, as a model for attaining easily, in the exercise of 
an ordinary life, solid and exalted virtue. To judge of 
his actions, we find nothing, so far as the exterior is 
concerned, extraordinary in his life. He died young, 
and never held any high office. Nor did he distinguish 
himself by any wonderful actions, but, on the contrary, 
he was extremely careful to remain hidden. Never- 
theless, the sublime degree of glory to which he is 
raised, can be nothing but the reward of great merit ; 
and this great merit can only be the fruit of extreme 
purity of heart, an interior life, living continually in 
the presence of God, a most tender and ardent love of 
Jesus Christ — in fine, of a consummate perfection, 
which he acquired in a few years, by the excessive love 
and tender devotion which he always had towards Jesus 
Christ in the most Blessed Sacrament. Nor was it 
without a special providence of God, that this faithful 
servant of Jesus Christ died as he had predicted and 
desired, on the day which is appointed for the Feast of 
the Sacred Heart, to which he had always been so 
devout. It was in this adorable Heart, so to speak, 



Digitized by Google 



108 



SECOND PART. 



that he received, from his childhood, the grace of most 
sublime contemplation, and a continual gift of tears. 
So abundant were these tears, especially at Mass, 
immediately after the Consecration, that his garments 
were all wet with them. From the same source sprung 
the extreme tranquillity of heart, which he preserved 
unaltered amidst all the events and all the occupations 
of his life. Finally, from this Sacred Heart, says the 
historian of his life, his soul was filled with such 
ardour and such sweet consolation, that his coun- 
tenance appeared all on fire, and his heart palpitated 
so excessively, that it seemed as if it would burst from 
its place. Here he united himself so intimately with 
God, that, when he was obliged for any reason to dis- 
tract himself from this union, his heart felt a pain like 
that which is felt when a limb of the body is dislocated, 
as he himself attested. " I do not know how it is," he 
would sometimes say, "I am forbidden to apply my 
mind to God, lest this application should injure my 
head. But the effort I make not to apply, does me 
more harm than the application itself. For it has 
become a habit with me, and I find it no longer a 
labour, but sweetness and repose. I will, however, 
try to obey in the best manner I can." But, to form 
some idea of the sublime degree of glory which he 
enjoys in Heaven, and which we may consider to be 
the fruit of his interior life, and of his most ardent and 
tender love for the adorable Heart of Jesus Christ, it 
is enough to read what St. Mary Magdalen of Pazzi 
4 has said of it. Hear what is related by the author of 
the life of this Saint. 

"In the year 1600, on the 4th of April, the Saint, 
being in one of her accustomed raptures, saw in Heaven 
the glory of St. Aloysius Gonzaga, of the Society of 
Jesus, and surprised at the extraordinary sight, she 
began to speak, pausing between her words from time 
to time. « 0 how great is the glory of Aloysius, the son 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



109 



of Ignatius! I could never have believed it, if our 
IiOrd had not shown it to me. It seems to me that 
there can be no glory in Heaven like that of Aloysius. 
I say it again, Aloysius is a great Saint. We have 
many Saints in the Church, whom I do not believe to 
be as exalted. Would that I could go over the whole 
world, to say that Aloysius, son of Ignatius, is a great 
Saint; and would that I could show the glory he 
enjoys, that God Himself might be glorified thereby. 
He is raised to this high degree of glory, because he 
led an interior life. Who can express the price and 
value of an interior life? There is no comparison 
between the interior and the exterior. All the time 
Aloysius was upon earth, he had his eyes fixed on the 
Divine Word. Aloysius was a hidden martyr. For 
whoever knows Thee, oh my God, knows Thee to be so 
great and so amiable, that it is a great martyrdom to 
see that he does not love Thee, and that Thou art so 
far from being loved by creatures, that Thou art even 
offended by them. He was also a Martyr, because he 
knew well how to suffer. Oh how Aloysius loved upon 
earth ! It is for this that he now enjoys God in Heaven 
with so great a plenitude of love. Whilst he was in 
this mortal life, he continually shot forth darts of love 
into the Heart of the Eternal Word. Now that he is 
in Heaven, these darts return into his own heart, and 
remain fixed there ; for the acts of love and charity, 
which he then made, caused him extreme delight.'" 
Such are the Saint's own words. 

It is easy to recognize in this description, the exact 
portrait of one, truly and perfectly devout to the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus Christ. Those who sincerely desire to 
become so, and to obtain a love of tenderness for Jesus 
Christ, and the gift of an interior life, and of living 
continually in the presence of God, should have a 
tender devotion to this great Saint. He will make 
them soon feel the sweet effects of his intercession with 



Digitized by Google 



110 



SECOND PART. 



Jesus and Mary, whom he loved with so much ardour 
and tenderness, and by Whom he was so tenderly 
loved. 

On this account the Nuns of the Convent of the 
Angels at Florence, besides a daily devotion to this 
great Saint, celebrate his feast annually in their Con- 
vent, in the most solemn manner, to obtain by his 
intercession this interior recollection, continual union 
with God, most ardent and tender love of Jesus Christ, 
and perfect devotion to His Sacred Heart. 

VII.— A Day of Retreat every Month. 

The seventh and last means for acquiring and pre- 
serving this ardent love of Jesus Christ is so useful 
and necessary, that we may say that without it, all the 
others which have been proposed are but of little avail. 
However sincere may be our will to have an ardent 
love for Jesus Christ, we require to renew from time to 
time the reflections from which it took its rise. There 
is not a more suitable means for renewing, from time 
to time, these salutary reflections, and with them the 
fervour that is their ordinary fruit, than by making a 
day's Retreat every month. For this purpose it is not 
necessary that we should seek solitude elsewhere than 
in our own house. We may even make this retreat 
without interrupting our ordinary business, or omitting 
the smallest obligations of our state. * All that is re- 
quired is that we withdraw ourselves, for a day, from 
some kind of amusement, from some unnecessary visit, 
in order to examine whether we have relaxed in the 
practice of virtue, whether we fulfil with punctuality 
the least duties of our state, whether we have more 
love and gratitude towards Jesus Christ, whether we 
make any progress in virtue, and what fruit we draw 
from the use of the Sacraments. 

The manner of making this Retreat will be found in 
the book we have referred to above. Meditations for 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV." 



Ill 



each month on the most important truths of faith are 
given there at length, with the considerations that may 
be made each day. It seems to me there cannot be a 
more effectual means for continually advancing in 
virtue. One day in the month is all that is required. 
We are at liberty to choose whatever day is most 
convenient. We must indeed have but little love for 
Jesus Christ, if we refuse to consecrate to Him at least 
one day in each month. 



END OF THE SECOND PART. 



Digitized by Google 



112 



THIRD PART. — PRACTICE. 



Chapter I. 

What are the motives and sentiments with which we should 
practise this devotion. 

As the sanctity and merit of our actions depends on 
the motive and spirit with which they are actuated, 
the practice of the devotion to the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus, however holy, would be of little use, unless it 
were animated with the spirit and the motive which 
gives it all its value. This motive, as we have said, is 
to repair, as far as possible, by our love, our adoration, 
and by every kind of homage the indignities and out- 
rages which Jesus Christ has endured, and still daily 
endures, in the most blessed Sacrament. It is in this 
spirit, and in these sentiments, the devotion should be 
practised. 

But as it may not always be convenient to read over 
what has been said on this subject, in various parts of 
this book, and as it is not always easy to remember 
what we have read, I have thought it well to recapitu- 
late in the beginning of this part, the principal reflec- 
tions which may help to inspire us with this spirit and 
these sentiments. We shall perhaps be obliged to 
repeat much that we have said before, but I have 
thought it weD to make these repetitions in order to 
render the practice of the devotion- more useful and 
convenient. 

To enter, then, into the sentiments with which we 
should practise this devotion, we have only to consider 
seriously and attentively, in what manner Jesus Christ 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER I. 



118 



treats us in the adorable Eucharist, and how He is 
treated. Let us represent to ourselves the eagerness 
with which He offers us this heavenly food, and the 
disgust with which we receive it. If His love is un- 
bounded, the ingratitude with which men receive this, 
the greatest proof of His love, can go no further. Had 
it been left to our choice to ask of Jesus Christ the 
greatest proof He could give of His love for us, could 
we ever have imagined to ourselves anything so won- 
drous? Had it even entered our minds, should we 
ever have had the boldness to ask or hope for it ? 

And yet this wonder has been wrought. It is this 
means which Jesus Christ has chosen for proving to us 
the excess of His love. After having done all, and given 
everything, to show us to what a degree He loves us, 
He gives us His own Body and Blood. He gives Him- 
self in the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar. If 
He had possessed anything better or more precious, He 
would have given it to us. No place keeps Him aloof ; 
no person, however wretched he may be, disgusts Him ; 
no time obliges Him to delay. And yet so marvellous 
a condescension, so wonderful a love, which has as- 
tonished the universe, has not been able to secure Him 
from the ingratitude and outrages of mankind. The 
first Communion of all was dishonoured by the most 
horrible sacrilege. This has been succeeded by all the 
outrages and profanations that hell has been able to 
invent. All respect for Jesus Christ upon our Altars 
has been lost. He has there been treated as a mock 
king, and a false divinity. Churches in which He had 
deigned to remain continually for the love of man have 
been plundered, demolished, and burnt. The Altars, on 
which He daily immolates Himself for mankind, have 
been destroyed. The sacred vessels, which had been so 
often used in the awful sacrifice of the Mass, have been 
broken, melted, and profaned. Nay, even His Sacred 
Body, in the consecrated Host, has been dragged along 

i 



Digitized by Google 



114 



THIRD PART. 



the ground and trampled under foot. And, what might 
horrify the very devils themselves, monsters, worse 
than demons, have pierced these sacred Hosts with 
repeated blows. The miraculous Blood, which has 
often been seen to flow from them, has served only to 
increase their fury and impiety. They have cut them 
in pieces, thrown them into the flames, and as if their 
sacrilegious hands and detestable hearts were not suffi- 
ciently impure, they have thrown them to the most 
unclean aninials. In a word, they have put them to 
such execrable uses, that Thou alone, oh my God, 
couldst have endured it. The very thought fills the 
soul with horror. This is what the love of Jesus 
Christ has exposed Him to. This is the gratitude of 
men for so wondrous a gift. There is no one, however 
abject, who would not have been treated with less con- 
tempt. There is no criminal who would not have met 
with less insult, and for whom the most lively com- 
passion would not have been felt, had he been so ill- 
treated. Is Jesus Christ then to be the only one who 
is to be outraged without awakening any compassion 
in us ? Has He done us any wrong in loving us to this 
excess ? If it be a crime, pardon me the expression, 
O my God ! if it be a crime to have loved us too much, 
then is Jesus Christ guilty. But should this excess of 
love excite hatred in those who will not believe how 
much He loves us? Are we to take occasion from hence 
to forget Him, to show no respect in His presence, and 
to have no feeling for the injuries done Him ? It is 
true that the greater part of these horrible sacrileges 
are the effect of the rage of heretics. But, oh my 
Saviour, how many Catholics are there who treat Thee 
no less ill ? The abomination penetrates even into the 
sanctuary. It is difficult to say which is the most 
guilty of impiety and ingratitude, the heretic who pro- 
fanes the temples in which he does not believe Jesus 
Christ to be really present, or the Catholic who, whilst 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER I. 



115 



he professes to believe it, presents himself before Jesus 
Christ with so little respect. 

Some talk of news or of business even at the very 
foot of the Altar. Nay, we must confess it, oh my God, 
even abominable and impious conversations are held 
there. Many show a greater respect in the presence 
of well-bred persons than they do in the presence of 
Jesus Christ. What would not be tolerated in children 
at home, is allowed them in the Church. The apparel 
of our Altars is not always as clean and costly as the 
dress of many Catholics. Many Churches, owing to 
the negligence of those who have charge of them, are 
less cleanly than the commonest apartments of an or- 
dinary dwelling-house. Some assist at Mass as if they 
were at the theatre. Many are more attentive and less 
restless during a play than they are at the celebration 
of the sacred mysteries. After touching the ground 
with one knee, and doing just enough to show that 
they are not disrespectful through inadvertence, or 
from want of faith, they sit, stand up, or talk. Such 
is the homage, the love and gratitude that Jesus 
Christ receives in return from the very many of the 
faithful ! 

Priests are raised by their sublime dignity above the 
rest of men. They are obliged by their condition and 
their ministry to approach more closely and more fre- 
quently to Jesus Christ, and they are loved in a special 
manner by Him. But can it be said that all Priests 
love Jesus Christ, and that, though elevated by their 
character above the very Angels themselves, they are 
as grateful as they should be ? Does their life corre- 
spond with the sublime perfection of their state ? Jesus 
Christ has distinguished them, in His mercy, from the 
rest of the faithful. But do they distinguish themselves 
from other Christians by their virtues, and especially 
by their lively faith ? Alas, one would say, to see some 
Priests at the Altar, that the Body of Jesus Christ, 

i 2 



Digitized by Google 



116 



THIRD PART. 



Which they hold in their hands, is some mere instru- 
ment which they are using to perform some trivial 
ceremonies. As they often feel nothing but indiffer- 
ence for Jesus Christ, the time which they employ in 
offering this august sacrifice is often very short. They 
pass from some profane occupation to the Altar, and 
often from the Altar to amusements and profane em- 
ployments. Mass would seem to be some task which 
they learn to go through boldly, without thinking of it, 
and as it were from habit, by dint of going through it 
repeatedly. They hold the Body of Jesus Christ in 
their hands with as little feeling as they hold the 
Missal. This negligence, coldness, and insensibility 
show too plainly the little esteem they entertain for 
this adorable Body, or at least the incomprehensible 
blindness in which they live. If from our Lord's 
ministers we pass to the rest of the faithful, and cast 
a glance on the majority of Christians, we shall have 
no less reason to deplore our ingratitude and want of 
faith. There are, it is true, some who communicate 
frequently. But how few are the true servants of Jesus 
Christ who are to be found amongst them ? Not to 
speak of the little fruit they gain from Communion (a 
sure sign of the bad disposition in which they communi- 
cate), it is impossible to think of the little devotion with 
which they receive Jesus Christ without a deep feeling 
of indignation. We may add also to the insults offered 
to Jesus Christ by those who have so little love for 
Him, the indifference and forgetfulness of those who 
make a profession of loving Him. There is no visit 
paid with more weariness and less eagerness than the 
Visits which are paid to Jesus Christ in the adorable 
Sacrament. It is enough that the Holy Ghost invites 
us to them by His inspirations to make us at once find 
numberless excuses for exempting ourselves from them. 
If we are obliged by our state to make them more fre- 
quently, do we not on this account accustom ourselves 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER I. 



117 



to perform them with less respect ? We have only to 
observe the manner in which some enter the Church. 
They enter it as if it were a room. They present 
themselves before the Blessed Sacrament as if it were 
merely an image. Their want of modesty and respect, 
their eyes glancing in every direction, show that the 
visit to the Blessed Sacrament, with the greater num- 
ber, is little else but affectation. They make it with 
little respect, because they make it with little faith. 
These two defects destroy all the fruit. 

Thus it is, oh Lord, that the greatest of all Thy 
benefits is repaid ! This is our gratitude ! We should 
treat Jesus Christ better if He had loved us less ! Had 
He retained in the Blessed Sacrament that air of 
majesty which renders Him terrible even to the devils, 
were He to chastise on the spot those who insult His 
Divine Majesty, He would, without doubt, be more re- 
spected and feared. But Jesus Christ cannot resolve 
upon this. He prefers to expose Himself to the insults 
of the wicked, and suffer everything, rather than keep 
a single one of His children at a distance, by pardoning 
nothing. He prefers, so to speak, the outrages which 
He endures from the first to the want of confidence 
which the terror of His chastisements would create in 
the last. This very excess of goodness, which should 
of itself gain for Him the love and respect of all, ex- 
poses Him daily to fresh insults, and is the reason why 
He meets with less love. 

What can awaken our feelings if this does not ? We 
feel for a stranger whom we see cruelly treated ; we 
compassionate any poor wretch whom we see abused. 
Shall Jesus Christ be the only one to Whose sufferings 
we are insensible? Shall we look with indifference 
only on Jesus Christ, despised, outraged, ill-treated by 
all in the Blessed Sacrament? There is no outrage 
which He has not received, no injury which He has 
not suffered ; there is not a spot in the world where 



Digitized by Google 



118 



THIRD PART. 



due respect is paid Him. And all this because He has 
loved us too much. It is plain that He has loved 
us to excess. How is it that this very excess of 
love freezes the hearts of those for whom He has such 
love ? Indeed, if we have any feeling of humanity left, 
can we reflect on the derision He meets with from so 
many wicked and ungrateful men, in which number, 
perhaps, we ourselves are; can we look on Jesus 
Christ, so neglected, so little loved, so unworthily 
treated, without feeling our hearts pierced with grief ? 
Can we be contented with mere ordinary feelings of gra- 
titude? Can we fail to do all we can to repair these injuries 
by our profound adoration, our love and homage ? It is 
true the Church has instituted for this end one of the 
most solemn festivals, in which Jesus Christ is borne 
in triumph with great pomp, in order to make Him a 
reparation of honour for the many injuries He has re- 
ceived in the adorable Eucharist. But does not this 
very feast, through the disrespect and irreverence com- 
mitted throughout the Octave in the presence of the 
Blessed Sacrament, become an occasion of new insults 
to Jesus Christ ? It is on this account that our loving 
Saviour has chosen the Friday after the Octave as a 
second special feast, on which His Sacred Heart may 
be truly adored by His perfect friends. The first is the 
feast of His precious Body ; the second the feast of His 
Sacred Heart. His love for us triumphs in the first ; 
our love for Him should triumph the second. In the 
first the Church solemnly exhibits to us the excess of 
the love of Jesus Christ for us ; in the second we should 
protest, before Heaven and earth, how sincerely we love, 
Jesus Christ. 

With this view, all who have any feeling of love for 
Jesus Christ should celebrate solemnly, and with great 
care, the Feast of the Sacred Heart of Jesus. In it He 
desires to distinguish, as it were, His dearest friends, 
who love Him with a generous, grateful, and tender 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



119 



love, from those who love Him only coldly and in apr 
pearance. He desires that, full of grief for the un- 
worthy treatment He has received in the Blessed 
Sacrament, and sorrowing at the sight of so much 
ingratitude, they should make Him a reparation of 
honour, an acknowledgment of the love He has shown 
us, and an attestation of their own, by making some 
return, and consecrating the whole of this day in 
honour of the Sacred Heart. These are the senti- 
ments that should animate us in all the practices of 
this devotion. We should occupy ourselves with them 
more particularly during the visits we pay to the 
Blessed Sacrament, in time of Mass, and at Holy Com- 
munion. We have already shown, in another part of 
this work, what is the spirit in which these holy actions 
should be performed. But, as they are singularly adapt 
ted, of all exercises of piety, for honouring the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus Christ, and inflaming our hearts with 
His holy love, it has been thought well to speak of 
them a little more at length here, in the hope that 
hereby tbey may be practised with greater fervour. 
We will afterwards treat of them separately, distributed 
according . to the different times of the year, together 
with meditations adapted to this devotion. 

Chapter II. 

Visits to the Blessed Sacrament. 

I. Motives that should induce us to visit (he Blessed 
Sacrament, 

Before the coming of our Saviour, in that period of 
rigour when Almighty God would be called the aveng- 
ing God, the 6trong God, the God of armies ; when He 
only spoke, as it were, in a voice of thunder ; when 
princes and sovereigns alone were permitted to enter 
the holy place specially consecrated to Him ; when He 
exacted so respectful a worship, and punished so severely 



Digitized by Google 



120 



THIRD PART. 



the slightest faults committed against the respect due 
to Him ; when kings and priests, overcome by holy 
fear, hardly dared to enter the Temple on beholding a 
simple cloud, which was only a somewhat more sensible 
sign of God's presence in that place ; when this prodigy 
obliged the people to prostrate themselves and cry out, 
full of admiration, and with the deepest feelings of 
gratitude : " How good is the God, Whom we adore ! 
we will sing His mercies for ever, because He has 
deigned to choose Himself a dwelling amongst us : " if 
at that time what we have since witnessed could have 
been more clearly foreseen, if they had been told that 
this God, so terrible, would humble Himself so far as 
to become man for the love of men, and that, after 
dying for these very men, He would continually work 
one of the greatest miracles, in order to be with them 
even to the end of ages, would they have believed it? 

There is, however, something which would have ap- 
peared more incredible to them still. Would they ever 
have believed, that after Almighty God had humbled 
Himself in this manner, mankind would refuse to love 
Him, pay court to Him, and visit Him ? And yet this 
is what has happened. There are Christians, and those 
not a few, who consider it a trouble to pay this respect 
to Jesus Christ. And would not the disrespectful man* 
ner of the greater number of those who visit Him give 
us reason to ask the same question as our Saviour once 
asked : The Son of Man, when He cometh, shall He find, 
think you, faith on earth ? (Luke xviii. 8.) 

If this faith is not extinct, is it not more extraor- 
dinary to believe the real presence of Jesus Christ on 
our Altars, and to have no other feeling for Him than 
indifference, and to be no more eager to pay Him our 
homage than those who do not believe in His presence ? 
Civility, friendship, gratitude, and interest are usually 
the motives that induce mankind to pay visits. We 
cannot with propriety exempt ourselves from honouring 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



121 



a person distinguished for his merit, his employment, 
or his rank. Great friends part with regret, and allow 
few occasions of seeing one another to escape. We 
make at least some visits of civility to persons from 
whom we have received some service, and we are 
assiduous in our attendance upon those from whom 
we expect some benefit, or we fear some chastise- 
ment 

Does not Jesus Christ hold a sufficiently distin- 
guished place in the world to merit that court should 
be paid Him? Has Jesus Christ loved us much ? Have 
we received any benefit from Him ? Have we reason 
to expect that He will do us any service ? Since He 
will be our Judge, and since our eternal felicity or 
misery depends upon Him, have we any interest in 
gaining His favour ? It is extraordinary that on this 
subject all agree on what ought to be done, and yet no 
one takes the trouble to do what he ought. 

If it had been left to our choice to ask our divine 
Saviour for some manifest proof of His love for us, 
would it ever have occurred to us to entreat Him, 
when He was about to ascend into Heaven, to remain 
on earth with us to the end of ages ? If He Himself 
had made this offer, with what sentiments of admiration, 
respect, and gratitude should we not have accepted it ? 
Jesus Christ has granted us this signal favour. The 
excess of His love has led Him to give us this manifest 
proof of His tenderness. But His excessive love has 
only served, we may say, to make us carry our ingrati- 
tude to the highest pitch. What would be said of any 
one who rarely visited, and merely saluted in passing, 
a person of the highest rank and worth, who had come 
solely for the purpose of rendering him some service, 
and was residing for a long time in some foreign 
country, merely out of regard for him ? 

What is the motive which induced Jesus Christ to 
remain with us, after the work of our Redemption was 



Digitized by Google 



THIRD PART. 



accomplished ? After He had ascended to His Father, 
why would He return invisibly on earth ? Why does 
He remain, day and night, in an obscure and humble 
guise upon our Altars, except that He cannot, as it were, 
separate Himself from mankind, and that His delight 
is to be with them ? Be not afflicted, my children, 
He says to us, I will not leave you orphans. I am 
ascending to Heaven, but at the same time I remain on 
earth. You are weak, sick, and languishing. You will 
be often afflicted. You will fear the anger and the 
justice of My Father. But you will find in Me, in the 
Blessed Sacrament, a Father who will console you, a 
Physician who will heal you, a Guide who will conduct 
you, a Master who will solve all your doubts, a Hea- 
venly Food which will give you new strength, and 
finally, your Redeemer and your Saviour. Will not 
this be enough to move mankind, who have so much 
feeling for their own interests, and are naturally so 
strongly inclined to gratitude ? To any other person 
we should be less ungrateful, even though it were for 
smaller favours. But when it is to Jesus Christ that 
gratitude is to be shown, ingratitude ceases to be a crime* 
We abandon and forget Jesus Christ upon our Altars. 
We can always spend many hours of the day in idleness 
and in vain amusements. But if we have to find some 
time in the afternoon to visit Jesus Christ in the 
Blessed Sacrament, our employments will not admit of 
it; we have no time. Is it then so very difficult to 
perform this duty, though it is, as all allow, so just and 
reasonable ? Does it require so much time ? No : a 
quarter, or half a quarter of an hour, is enough. Very 
often we have only to take a few steps. But our want 
of love for Jesus Christ makes this visit difficult and 
inconvenient. We at once find a hundred false reasons, 
a hundred obstacles, which in any other case would 
have no weight with us, but which hold us back when 
we have something to do for Jesus Christ. Instances 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER H. 



123 



are recorded of newly-converted Christians among the 
savages in Canada, in the Indies and Japan, who have 
travelled 200 leagues to some Church, in order there 
to adore Jesus Christ. Others, who could not under- 
take so long a journey, prostrated themselves more than 
a hundred times a day in the direction in which they 
knew there was a Church. They would thus fain 
satisfy, by their repeated adorations, their desire of 
assiduously paying their court to Jesus Christ. In the 
day of judgment what answer will so many negligent 
Christians be able to make, who have only to take a 
step, as it were, to adore Jesus Christ, and yet re- 
peatedly pass by the spot where Jesus Christ resides, 
and allow whole days to elapse without visiting Him ? 
What answer will so many religious persons be able to 
make who, having Jesus Christ in their own house, 
care so little about visiting Him ? Pojndus veto mem 
obUtus est mei (Jerem. ii. 82). Those who profess to be 
wholly consecrated to My service, and whom I regard 
as My special people, even they have forgotten Me. 

Medius vestnm stetit, quern vo& neadtis (Joan. i. 26). 
We know Him not, nor do we desire to know Him, 
though day and night He is in the midst of us. He is 
our Lord and our God, Who is on our Altars expressly 
to hear our prayers, and to receive our homage. Are 
we sad, afflicted, or unhappy ? Let us have recourse 
to Jesus Christ. Let us go and lay before Him, as our 
good Father, the misfortunes that have happened to us, 
or that threaten us. Do we find it difficult to make 
some resolution ? would we see peace restored in the 
bosom of some family ? is there some one whose con- 
version we have at heart? are we tepid, inconstant, 
imperfect in God's service ? Let us run to Jesus 
Christ, let us ask Him for these graces with sim- 
plicity, with a humble and respectful familiarity, but 
above all with great confidence. Let us seek, let us 
knock, let us ask even with importunity. It is this im- 



Digitized by Google 



124 



THIRD PART. 



portunity, this confidence that gains the Heart of 
Jesus Christ. It is all powerful. Jesus Christ often 
defers granting our request merely to oblige us to visit 
Him more frequently. 

What a loss it is for Christians to neglect so easy 
and powerful a means of becoming happy and holy ! 
What remorse will so many religious persons feel at 
the hour of death, who now feel this loss so little ? 
They need not be surprised that they feel so little de- 
votion, that they go on creeping day after day in the 
path of piety, that they do not receive consolation or 
interior sweetness, that they live in uneasiness and 
melancholy, and that at last they die in remorse and 
fear. Our neglect in not frequently visiting Jesus 
Christ in the Blessed Sacrament, our dissipation of 
mind, our want of modesty and respect when we make 
these visits, are the most ordinary source of the greater 
part of our misfortunes. 

Those, on the contrary, who are faithful in visiting 
the Blessed Sacrament as often as they can, know by 
their own experience, that there is no more easy or 
certain means for obtaining all they ask for from Jesus 
Christ They know that if they only visit Him with 
faithful assiduity and respectful confidence, especially 
at certain hours of the day when few visit Him, there 
is scarcely any grace that they do not receive, but most 
especially true devotion, and a tender love of Jesus 
Christ. Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis, et onerati estis, 
et Ego reficiam vos. Come to Me all you that labour and 
are burdened, and I will refresh you (St. Matt. xi. 28). 

II. Method of Visiting the Blessed Sacrament. 

If our visits to the Blessed Sacrament should be 
frequent, they should not, on that account, be less 
respectful. We should never enter the Church but 
with the greatest modesty. We should keep our. 
selves! whilst there, in profound respect, full of sentU 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



195 



ments, of gratitude, confidence, and love. To make a 
place holy, it is enough that it is destined to honour 
Almighty God. From the moment of its solemn con- 
secration to this purpose it becomes an object of rever- 
ence to the Angels, and of terror to the devils. It is 
only just that the majesty of God, with which it is then 
in a special manner filled, and the presence of Jesus 
Christ who dwells therein, should render it still more 
an object of holy awe to men, and in a special manner 
to Christians. 

All the sanctity that the birth of Christ communi- 
cated to the stable of Bethlehem, His precious Blood to 
Calvary, and His Sacred Body to the Sepulchre, we 
find in our Churches. If, on our entering them, and 
approaching the Altar, we do not experience that holy 
fear which is felt in drawing near the holiest spots, and 
are not moved by those feelings which cause such sweet 
tears of piety to flow at the sight of the manger where 
Christ was born, or the place where He expired, it can 
proceed from nothing but a want of faith or a want of 
reflection. 

We shall remedy this evil if, before entering the 
Church, we reflect awhile on the sanctity of the place 
and the majesty of Him Whom we are going to visit. 
If it were as easy to gain an entrance into the palaces 
of the great, and to approach their persons, as it is to 
enter our Churches, how many would think themselves 
happy, who now think nothing of the happiness they 
can enjoy so easily, in approaching the adorable Person 
of Jesus Christ at any hour. 

Modesty, then, and profound respect, impressed on 
our demeanour as often as we enter a Church, are the 
visible signs of our faith. Love towards Jesus Christ 
must be, as it were, the soul of our prayers. We must 
never omit to honour and to adore, in a particular man- 
ner, the Sacred Heart of Jesus, whenever we visit the 
Blessed Sacrament It is a devotion highly pleasing 



Digitized by Google 



126 



THIRD FART. 



to Him, and it will be most profitable to those who prac- 
tise it. It is generally better, when we are before Jesus 
Christ, to speak little and meditate much. An affec- 
tionate silence, which is, as it were, the language of the 
heart, pleases Jesus Christ much more than a great 
number of vocal prayers, said with haste, and commonly 
without attention. The excessive love of Jesus Christ 
for us, His goodness, His meekness, His liberality, and 
His patience in this adorable mystery, ought to excite 
in us the tenderest affections. We should be filled 
with respect, gratitude, confidence and love of Jesus 
Christ. We should go to visit Jesus Christ as the 
angels, the shepherds, and the kings visited Him at 
His birth ; and, like them, adore Him ; or like the 
Apostles, hear Him preach; or like Magdalen, pros- 
trate at His feet, deplore our sins, or contemplate His 
adorable perfections ; or finally, like sick persons, beg 
to be healed of our infirmities. One of the reasons 
why we derive so little profit from these visits is, that 
we do not go to Jesus Christ with the simplicity and 
confidence He requires. We pass the whole time in 
some practices of devotion in which the mind has more 
share than the heart, instead of simply laying open our 
wants, infirmities, and weaknesses to Jesus Christ ; as 
the Psalmist says, pouring out our hearts before Him, in 
the language of the Prophet : Effundite coram Mo corda 
vestra (Ps. lxi. 9) ; saying to Him with the sisters of 
Lazarus : Ecce, quern amas infirmatur {J oan. xi. 8). Lord, 
behold he whom Thou lovest is sick, he for whom Thou 
hast become man, for whom Thou hast given Thy Blood, 
to whom Thou givest Thyself every day in the adorable 
Eucharist, and for the love of whom Thou remainest 
continually on this Altar, he has long laboured under 
such and such an infirmity, he wants this or that help 
or grace. Ecce quern amas infirmatur, or with the leper : 
Domine, si vis, potes me mundare: Lord, if Thou wilt, 
Thou canst make me clean (St. Luke v. 12). Why 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



127 



shouldst Thau not will it? After all Thou hast done 
for me, and after all that Thou still dost in my favour, 
can I doubt that Thou wiliest it ? And if Thou wiliest 
it, who shall have power to hinder it ? At other times, 
let us imagine to ourselves that, like Magdalen, we are 
at the feet of Jesus Christ. If we do not feel devotion 
enough to shed as many tears as she did, still let us, 
like her, remain in silence. Or, if we speak, let it be 
to express, with St. Thomas, the sentiments of admira- 
tion, respect, and love which should reign in our hearts : 
Dominus mens, et Deus meus : my Lord and my God (St. 
John xx. 28) ; repeating often with the Centurion : Credo, 
Domine, adjuva incredulitatem meam : I do believe, Lord ; 
help my unbelief (St. Mark ix. 28). We must also, like 
the Cananean woman, ask our Divine Lord, with ear- 
nestness and importunity, for all the graces we stand 
in need of. Jesus Christ loves us tenderly. He is on 
our Altars only to do us good. He can and He will do 
it. Say, then, to Him with confidence : Jems, Son of 
David, have mercy on me (St. Luke xviii. 88). Though 
He seems to reject us, and does not answer, but refuses 
everything, let us still persevere with fidelity, let us ask 
more and more earnestly ; and, as if we did not perceive 
the harsh manner in which He seems to treat us, let us 
cry out more and more, Lord, help me. It is true, we 
may add, that it is not good to take the bread of the 
children, and to cast it to the dogs, but the whelps oho eat 
of the crumbs that fall from the table of their masters. 
Treat me at least in the same manner. If we oblige 
Him by our sins not to hear our prayers, let us say to 
Him, with simplicity and confidence : " Thou hast 
solemnly engaged Thyself, oh Lord, to grant me all 
that I shall ask in Thy name. In Thy name I ask 
grace to correct myself of that imperfection which has 
so long kept me back in the path of piety, to overcome 
that ruling passion which is the source of so many 
defects, to acquire that virtue which is so necessary for 



Digitized by Google 



138 



THIRD FUBT. 



my salvation and perfection. In Thy name I beg for 
the conversion of this son, the health of a husband, the 
successful issue of this or that business, and the assist- 
ance which is necessary in such and such necessities. 
Thou knowest, oh Lord, that I labour under this defect, 
that I possess not that virtue, that I want courage in 
adversity, moderation in joy, strength in certain cir- 
cumstances, and great graces in all. Thou knowest 
that I have not a sufficiently strong faith ; my confi- 
dence sometimes wavers ; I love Thee but feebly, and 
hardly have I the desire to love Thee. Give me, then, 
oh Lord, give me all these graces, and let them be effi- 
cacious. Remember that Thou hast promised to refuse 
me nothing that I ask in Thy name. Perhaps what I 
ask is not pleasing to Thee, and Thou refusest me be- 
cause I do not know what I ask. But there is no 
danger of this, nor canst Thou reproach me thus when 
I ask for Thy perfect love. Inflame me, oh Lord, with 
this ardent love, and let it be generous, constant, and 
faithful ; a love that is rather solid than sensible and 
sweet, a love that may make me live for Thee alone. 
Give me, oh Lord, this perfect, ardent, and tender love, 
and I am satisfied : Amorem tui solum cum gratia tua 
mihi dones, et dives sum satis." 

It is good to consider sometimes what must be the 
sentiments of Jesus Christ upon the Altar on seeing 
Himself forgotten and abandoned by almost all. We 
may imagine, at the same time, that He says to us 
what He said to His Apostles for a similar reason : 
Nurnquid et vos vidtis abire ? (John vi. 68) : Will you 
oho go away ? At the same time, with the tenderest 
sentiments of love, grief, and gratitude, we must answer 
with St. Peter: Domine ad quern ibimus? verba vita 
aterruB habes (John vi. 69) : Lord, to whom shall we go ? 
Thou hast the words of eternal life ; we have believed and 
known that Thou art the Christ, the Son of God. We 
may also, in order to excite ourselves to greater love, 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



129 



and to force Jesus Christ, as it were, to embrace us with 
a more tender and ardent charity, represent to ourselves 
that He asks us from the Altar, as He once asked St. 
Peter : Simon Joannis, amasme? (John xxi. 17) : Simon, 
ton of John, lovest thou Me ? We must reply with the 
same Apostle : Yes, Lord, Thou knowest well that I 
love Thee ; or rather, my loving Saviour, Thou knowest 
how much I desire to love Thee. 
, It would be well, if we could detach ourselves from 
all that is not God, and often say to Him, with the 
Prophet, " Quid mihi est in cath et ate quid volui super 
terram ? Deus cordis mei et pars mea Deus in atemum V 
(Ps. lxxii. v. 25.) What have I in Heaven ? and besides 
Thee, what do I desire upon earth, but Thee, my God, 
the God of my heart, and my portion for ever! I know, 
0 Lord, that Thou art the Way, the Truth, and the 
Life. I am convinced that All who depart from Thee, 
shall perish eternally ! Quia ecce qui elongant se a te, 
peribunt. (Ps. lxxii. v. 27.) As for me, my loving 
Saviour, I find my repose, my joy, and my supreme 
felicity, only in being united with Thee, and in never 
separating myself from Thee. Mihi autem adhmrere 
Deo bonum est et ponere in Deo meo spent meam. 
(Ps. lxxii. v. 28.) In Thee, I place all my confidence. 
All my consolation would be to pass the rest of my days 
at the foot of Thy Altars. But as I cannot be there 
always in person, I will always be there in spirit. My 
treasure is upon the Altar ; my heart shall be there too. 
My heart shall be eternally united to Thy sacred Heart. 
It shall be to me in future my shelter, and the place of 
my rest. Hoc requies mea, hie habitabo. (Ps. xiii. v. 14.) 

Full of these sentiments of love and confidence, we 
may sometimes say to Him with great simplicity, and 
in a respectful, yet familiar manner, " Thou art in this 
place, oh Lord, only to do me good. Who is there 
then, that shall hinder it.? If my imperfections are an 
obstacle, begin, if it please Thee, by freeing me fr&m 

K 



Digitized by Google 



130 



THIRD PART; 



these imperfections. Cure these wounds, which make 
me displeasing in Thy sight. I have not loved Thee, it 
is true. I am deeply grieved that it has been so. But 
at least, it seems to me that I have a true desire of 
loving Thee, and if this desire were not sincere, I should 
not so often come before Thee, who seest to the bottom 
of the heart, to ask for Thy love. Until I am wholly in- 
flamed with this love, I shall never cease asking for it 
with earnestness, and even with importunity. DUigam te 9 
Domine, fortitudo mea et refugium meum" (Ps. xvii. v. 1.) 

We may also occupy ourselves usefully at this time, 
in making acts of faith, adoration, thanksgiving, hope, 
and love, each one according to his devotion. For 
example: " I believe, 0 Lord, that Thou art really pre- 
sent on this Altar, and it is my wish that the modesty 
and respect which I desire to show in Thy presence, 
should be a proof of the sincerity of my faith. I render 
Thee thanks for having loved me to such an excess. 
Humbly prostrate at Thy feet, I make Thee a repara- 
tion of honour, in atonement for all the insults and 
outrages Thou hast endured since the institution of this 
august Sacrament. I hope, oh Lord, and I am certain 
that Thy Providence will never fail me in my neces- 
sities, and will happily lead me to the accomplishment 
of thy designs, by the path which Thou wilt deign to 
show me. Open to me, oh Lord, Thy sacred Heart ; 
for this is the place of my repose. I wish to dwell 
therein all the days of my life, and there, at the hour of 
my death, to breathe out my last sigh." This is but an 
example of such acts as we may make. We can extend 
them as much aa we please. 

It is well, however, to remember the advice given by 
St. Francis, of Sales, on this subject, (Introd. to a Dev. 
Life. p. iiL, ch. 13.) "Prayers of this sort, which are 
indeed, properly speaking, only aspirations, are most 
useful. But it is my opinion." says this great Saint, 
" that we should not force ourselvea to repeat always 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



131 



the same words." Pronounce often, either with the 
heart or lips, those which love suggests to you at the 
time. It will always furnish you with what you want. 
There are, it is true, certain verses of the Psalms, and 
some passages of holy Scripture, which are most 
powerful in moving the heart. We must make use of 
those in which we find most devotion, and spend most 
time in them. 

HI. Practice for spending every day, a quarter, or half an 
hour in prayer, before the Blessed Sacrament, suited to all 
sorts of persons. 

This practice of devotion is easy. For, properly 
speaking, it consists only in loving Jesus Christ, and in 
making use of Jesus Christ Himself, in order to love 
Him. The method is as follows: — 

1. After having adored our Lord in this mystery, 
with all the respect that His real Presence requires, 
unite yourself to Him, and to all His Divine operations 
in the holy Eucharist, where He ceases not to love and 
adore God His Father in the name of all men, and in 
the most perfect manner which we can imagine, in the 
condition of a victim. Meditate and endeavour to un- 
derstand His recollection, His 3olitude, His hidden life, 
that wonderful deprivation of all things to which He is 
reduced, His obedience to the word of the Priest, 
whoever he be, His humility, and His other virtues, 
according to the example He gives us of them, in the 
Eucharistic state. Excite yourself to imitate them, and 
resolve to do it on such occasions as shall present 
themselves. But especially take time to consider the 
admirable dispositions of His Sacred Heart towards us, 
and all the sublime virtues of which He is the source, 
the immense love He has for his Father, His ardent 
charity for all men, and His eagerness for their salva- 
tion. Try to discover in that Divine Heart all the 
abysses it contains, of humiliation, abjection, poverty, 



Digitized by Google 



132 



THIRD PABT. 



suffering. Consider what axe the sentiments of His 
holy soul, at the sight of the ingratitude of men who 
have nothing but indifference for Him. Excite yourself 
to produce suitable acts, to make reparation as far as 
possible, for all these insults, by sentiments of gratitude, 
and chiefly by an ardent love of Jesus Christ. 

2. Offer to the Eternal Father, Jesus Christ, His Son, 
as the only Victim worthy of Him, and by Whom alone 
we can render homage to His supreme dominion, thank 
Him for His benefits, satisfy His justice, and oblige His 
mercy to come to our assistance : Say to Him with the 
Prophet: Respice in faciem Christi tui. Look on the face 
of Thy Christ, (Ps. lxxxiii. v. 10.) It is true my God, 
that I deserve to be treated as a rebellious servant. 
But, behold, oh Eternal Father, Thy dear Son, Who is 
perfectly obedient, and Who offers Himself to Thee at 
this moment upon this Altar. Look upon the profound 
abasement to which He is reduced, for the pardon of my 
infidelities and disobedience. Respite in faciem Christi 
tui. On whatever side Thy justice may accuse me, I 
will immediately offer Thy beloved Son to disarm it. 
Did I see Thy anger, a hundred times on the point of 
bursting over me, a hundred times I would say the 
same words : Respice in faciem Christi tui. I deserve 
nothing, but I offer Thee a victim that merits all. I 
consent that Thou shouldst refuse me both the pardon 
of my sins and all other graces, if He Whom I offer 
Thee, has not fully satisfied Thee. But thou canst not 
refuse me anything that I ask in virtue of the merits of 
Jesus Christ, of His sufferings and death. The re- 
ward of these belongs to us; for He hast ransferred 
them to us. I ask Thee much oh Eternal Father, but 
I offer Thee the Body, the Blood, and the life of Thy 
Son immolated on this Altar, in payment of what I ask. 
What can I desire, that will not fall short of the value 
of what I offer to obtain it? 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



133 



3. Offer yourself to God, by the hands of Jesus 
Christ; and offer to Him, your life, your employments, 
your inclinations, your passions, and in particular, 
some virtuous action, which you resolve to perform, or 
some mortification which you resolve to practise, in 
order to overcome yourself. And all this, for the same 
ends, for which our Lord immolates Himself in the 
blessed Sacrament. 

4. Offer yourself to Jesus Christ, in order to unite 
yourself more closely to Him. Entreat Him to make 
you enter into His spirit and into His sentiments, 
and especially into His Sacred Heart, so as never to 
depart from It. Look upon Jesus Christ as your 
head, and consider yourself as one of His members, 
His associates, and His brethren, to whom He has 
surrendered all His merits, and to whom He has left as 
a legacy, the reward due to Him from His Father, for 
His labours, and His death. In this character you 
may dare to present yourself before God with confidence, 
to converse familiarly with Him, and to oblige Him in 
some sort to hear you favourably, to grant your 
petitions, and to bestow upon you His graces, on 
account of the alliance and union existing between you 
and His Eternal Son, and through the infinite Value 
and dignity of the Victim, Whom we offer to Him in the 
Blessed Sacrament You may conclude by making a 
spiritual Communion, accompanied by a perfect conse- 
cration of all your affections and desires to His Sacred 
Heart. 

This method of prayer is excellent, and there is 
more reason for making it familiar to us, in as much, as 
our happiness in this life, depends on our union with 
Jesus Christ in the Blessed Sacrament It might be 
well to practise it once a day. Any time is suited to 
it, especially certain hours of the day, at which Jesus 
Christ is seldom visited. 



Digitized by Google 



134 



THIRD PABT. 



There is another most useful method of prayer, in 
presence of the Blessed Sacrament. After having 
made an act of faith, and adored Jesus Christ, excite 
yourself to a tender love of Him, and entreat Him to 
inflame you daily, more and more, with His love. 
Then enter into yourself, and examine the state of your 
soul, your defects, your passions, your weakness, your 
infirmities, and the depth of your miseries, and lay them 
open with simplicity hefore Jesus Christ. Submit 
yourself entirely to His holy will, and bless Him 
equally, for the chastisements of His justice, and for 
the favours of His mercy; humble yourself before His 
sovereign majesty ; make a sincere confession to Him 
of your sins and infidelities, ask His pardon for them, 
detest all the evil you have committed, and resolve to 
amend for the future. 

Enter then, as it were, into the adorable Heart of 
Jesus Christ. Consider the contempt He feels, for all 
that this world esteems : what idea He entertains of 
these vain honours, these apparent goods, and these 
insipid pleasures, mixed with so much bitterness. 
Reflect at the same time on the esteem He has for all, 
that the greater number of men lotfk upon with dis- 
gust. How pleasing in His eyes is a poor and obscure 
life, full of humiliations and contempt. Which of the 
two, then, is deceived? Are we, who esteem and love 
so passionately all that Jesus Christ despises, or is 
Jesus Christ Himself, Who wholly despises, and ex- 
pressly condemns, what we so eagerly seek after? 
These reflections, if seriously made, are most useful for 
freeing us from numberless false notions which de- 
ceive us, and for inspiring us with that true wisdom 
which we admire in the Saints. This kind of prayer 
is most useful. It is unconstrained, and gives room 
for the exercise of every affection. We may make it at 
any time, but especially after some unexpected mis- 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



135 



fortune, in order that we may submit ourselves to the 
chastisements of God's justice, or after the hurry and 
embarrassment of business, in order to regain our 
recollection. In fine, we have only to visit Jesus 
Christ often, to learn how to visit Him, and to taste the 
pleasure which is to be found in conversing with our 
Divine Lord. There is no one who is more amiable in 
the world, and no one who loves us more. His con- 
versation has no tediousness. To say, that we know 
not what to do before the Blessed Sacrament, is to say, 
that we do not know how to believe, how to ask for the 
graces which we need, how to love. We are unhappy 
in this world, only because we do not know our hap- 
piness. We do not know Him, who is in the midst of 
us. Is it possible that we should know Him, and yet 
love Him so little. Can we love Him, and yet so 
seldom visit him ? 

IV. A few words of advice on frequent visits to the 
Blessed Sacrament. 

In order to derive all the benefit we can, from 
frequent visits to the Blessed Sacrament, we shall do 
well to observe what follows: — 

1. We should never enter the Church, but with 
great modesty. This should be a visible proof of our 
faith, and of the reverence we feel for the holiness of 
the place. For this, it is enough, to reflect on what 
we are doing. A humble and respectful posture, a 
modest countenance, accompanied by interior recollec- 
tion, are very necessary dispositions for receiving signal 
favours from Jesus Christ. 

2. Our vocal prayers, should be short; but tender 
and affectionate. The simplest and least studied are 
best suited to one who speaks from the heart 

$. Though all times are seasonable for rendering our 



Digitized by Google 



136 



THIRD PART. 



homage to Jesus Christ, there are certain hours of the 
day, and certain days in the year, in which our visits 
are most pleasing to Him. Such are, the morning for 
religious persons and ecclesiastics, who have the Blessed 
Sacrament in their own house, and the afternoon for 
all kinds of persons. It is difficult to express the 
advantages gained by those who are diligent in being 
the first to visit the Blessed Sacrament on rising. 
The eagerness we show in going at once to adore the 
Blessed Sacrament, and in being the first to offer Him 
our homage, pleases Him exceedingly. It is very 
clear, that, were a servant, a friend, or a child, to show 
the same eagerness in our regard, we should be deeply 
touched by it. We may judge then, what must be the 
effect produced in the Heart of our Divine Lord. This 
fervour and exactness oblige Him to grant us during 
the day, the special graces we need, in the exercise of 
our employments and on various occasions. Weak and 
imperfect souls, who have hardly any love for Jesus 
Christ, never manifest this eagerness for any length of 
time, though it is so reasonable and just. For it is as 
much the effect, as the cause, of a most ardent love of 
Jesus Christ. The afternoon is also a very suitable 
time for receiving great benefits from our loving Saviour, 
and for showing Him our love : especially at certain 
hours when He is almost forgotten, and is very rarely 
visited. It is neither the crowd that draws us thither 
at that time, nor custom that impels us. The love of 
Jesus Christ must be our chief motive. It is this that 
obliges Jesus Christ to be so liberal during these visits. 
It is during them that many great Saints have received 
those singular graces, which have conducted them in a 
short time to the highest perfection. Besides Feasts, 
which are especially consecrated to the service of God, 
there are certain days in the year, on which it is most 
useful to visit Jesus Christ, more assiduously than 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



187 



usual. Such are days devoted by the world to 
amusement. The carnival; times of public joy, and 
other similar occasions, with which the greater part of 
the world are wholly taken up, may be turned to great 
account by such as are generous and faithful enough to 
consecrate them particularly to Jesus Christ. One 
single mark, such as this, of love and fidelity, has 
proved the first source of the sublime perfection, 
attained by some of the greatest Saints. 

We must not depart from before the Blessed Sacra- 
ment before saying to Jesus Christ, in the words of 
Jacob : Non dimittam te, nisi benedixeris mihi (Gen. xxxii. 
26) : My Saviour, I will not leave Thee until Thou hast 
given me Thy blessing. 

We should entertain so great a respect for everything 
consecrated to Jesus Christ, especially for the place where 
He dwells, that nothing should ever make us relax on 
this point. We should never, under any pretext, fail 
to maintain that respect and silence which are so care- 
fully observed in the houses of the great. Let us never 
forget, each time we visit Jesus Christ, to honour His 
Sacred Heart by some special act of homage. Let us 
offer Him our hearts, that they may be so completely 
united to His, as of two hearts to form but one. 

Finally, all in general may be told that the great 
means of becoming recollected, spiritual, and solidly 
virtuous, is frequently to visit Jesus Christ in the 
Blessed Sacrament. If we would make these visits 
with profit, we must make them like persons who really 
believe that they are visiting Jesus Christ. We must 
act towards Him with great respect, simplicity, and 
confidence, speak little, listen to Him attentively, and 
love Him much. 



Digitized by Google 



138 



THIRD FART. 



Chapter m. 

Practice for celebrating and hearing Mass. 

I. Reflection on the Sacrifice of the Mass. 

As there is no act of worship on earth that renders 
greater honour to God than the holy sacrifice of the 
Mass, we ought to look upon it as the most important 
action of our lives. Everything is great and wonderful 
in this mystery. The power of God therein is infinite ; 
His love excessive ; His patience extreme. There is 
nothing about it that does not call for our admiration. 
We believe that God can work all these miracles if He 
wills, and there is no reason to doubt that He has 
willed it. But what is more incomprehensible and 
surprising is, to see a Priest at the Altar without 
gravity, devotion, or modesty ; to see Christians assist- 
ing at these tremendous mysteries only to profane them 
by their disrespect, the sinful state of their hearts, the 
dissipation of their minds, and the wandering of their 
senses. 

We can conceive that a man may be ungrateful 
enough to despise the benefits which he receives from 
another man, but it is incomprehensible that a man, 
who has, every day, the happiness of conversing fami- 
liarly with Jesus Christ, of holding Him in his hands, 
of distributing Him to the people, should set hardly 
any value on so sublime a dignity, and feel only cold- 
ness and indifference for Jesus Christ ; that, possessing 
faith, he should go to the Altar burdened with con- 
siderable imperfections ; that he should remain there 
without any sentiment of devotion or love ; and that he 
should depart from the Altar as little touched by the 
excellence and sublime sanctity of this mystery as when 
he went up to it. 

.A Priest at the Altar is the mediator between God 
and men. He treats with Almighty God in the name 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER III. 



189 



of the whole Church. He offers to Him a sacrifice 
proportioned to the benefits which we have received 
from Him, and which we desire to obtain : a sacrifice 
capable of cancelling all the sins of men : a sacrifice, 
in a word, that cannot but be pleasing to God. And 
yet, are there not to be found Priests, who are not at all 
moved by so holy and so sublime a ministry? Are 
there not some who are only known as Priests when 
they are seen at the Altar, and who even, at the Altar, 
dishonour the sanctity of their ministry by their want 
of devotion ? Is not the great haste with which this 
awful sacrifice is offered a visible mark of a want of 
faith ? Whole hours are spent agreeably in conversa- 
tion, but it is hard to spend half an hour with Jesus 
Christ. Is it possible that we feel weariness only when 
we are with Him ? 

If the account we shall have to give will be propor- 
tioned to the dignity of our employments and the 
benefits we have received ; if, to be saved, our virtue 
must correspond with the holiness of our state and of 
our ministry, has not a Priest, who possesses only a low 
degree of virtue, and who, after offering this adorable 
sacrifice several thousand times, is not more devout, 
but is perhaps even more imperfect than before he was 
a Priest, reason to fear the formidable judgments of 
God ? Has he, whom the Body and Blood of Jesus 
Christ could not move, when he held It in his hands, 
any ground for believing that there is anything in the 
world capable of making him less insensible ? 

The Priesthood is, without doubt, one of the highest 
dignities and greatest favours that God has ever granted 
to a mere creature. It is clear, then, that this exalted 
ministry requires perfect men. Though the virtue of 
the solitaries that lived in the time of St. J. Chrysostom 
had attained a great height of perfection, and the greater 
number possessed the gift of working miracles, yet their 



Digitized by Google 



140 



THIRD PART. 



virtue, says the Saint, is as far inferior to that which is 
fitting and necessary for the state of Priests, as the 
rank of a private person is below the majesty of a king : 
Tantum discrimen quantum sit inter privatum et Regem. 
(Chrys. de Sacerd.) 

Great graces, indeed, are required in order to attain 
to this degree of virtue. But has not a Priest the 
means of being all powerful ? Is not the holy sacrifice 
of the Mass an infallible means of obtaining all sorts 
of graces ? " Yes, my God," cries out a great servant 
of God (Fr. la Colombiere, Ret. Chret.j, penetrated 
with these sentiments : " when I pray, when I fast, 
when I give alms, I do it with diffidence. Perhaps, 
I say to myself, I dishonour God more by my bad inten- 
tions, and by the circumstances of my actions, than I 
honour Him by the action itself. This penance, so far 
from blotting out my sins, possibly may itself require 
penance. But when I say Mass or hear it, when I offer 
the adorable Sacrifice in quality of minister or member 
of the Church, then, oh my God, full of confidence and 
courage, I dare to challenge Heaven itself to do anything 
more pleasing to Thee. Then, without being terrified 
either by the number or the enormity of my sins, I dare 
to ask of Thee the pardon of them, not doubting but 
that Thou will grant it me in the most perfect manner 
I can desire. However vast may be my desires, how- 
ever great my hopes, I have no difficulty in asking for 
what is required to accomplish them. I ask of Thee 
graces, and great graces, and all sorts of graces for 
myself, for my friends, and for my bitterest enemies ; 
and so far from being ashamed of my request's, or of 
being diffident of obtaining so many things at the 
same time, I even think that I ask too little in com- 
parison with what I offer. I even feel as if I offered a 
slight to this living Sacrifice by asking infinitely less 
than It is worth. I fear nothing so much as not to 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER HI. 



141 



expect, with a firm and constant hope, not only all I 
have asked for, but even something greater, if possible, 
than all I can ask." 

Would to God that we understood the value of the 
treasure we possess ! Happy, indeed, are Christians, 
did they but know how to profit by its value ! What a 
source of every kind of good should we not find in this 
adorable Sacrifice ! What graces, what favours, what 
temporal and spiritual riches for the body and the soul, 
for time and eternity ! But, we must confess it, we do 
not even think of making use of our treasures. We do 
not condescend to put our hand into the treasury Jesus 
Christ has left us. 

What a remedy have we in our power against all 
sorts of evils ! We have a tree of life that can impart 
to us not only health, but even immortality, and yet 
we are oppressed with infirmities ! Had you been on 
Calvary, what would have been refused you ? When 
you are at Mass, you may receive the same benefits as 
you might have received on Calvary. Jesus Christ, in 
the Mass, places Himself in our hands as a victim of 
infinite value, to obtain from God all that we can 
desire, however precious the gift that we ask for. Jesus 
Christ, in the Sacrifice of the Mass, is not only our in- 
tercessor with His Father, to obtain from Him, through 
His merits, all that is necessary for us, and all that we 
wish for, He offers His Blood and His life as the price 
of what we ask. What can you desire that is not 
below the price you offer ? How comes it then, that 
all complain, some of their temporal miseries, others of 
their imperfections and failings ? How is it that our 
passions tyrannise over us ; that bad habits keep us, as 
it were, in chains ; that one is troubled with so many 
fruitless desires ; that another so frequently yields to 
temptation ; that impatience and anger daily infuriate 
some persons, and grief and melancholy oppress others ? 
How is it that a wife can neither soften her husband, 



Digitized by Google 



143 



THIRD PART. 



nor maintain peace in her family ? that a father sees 
with grief his children following the path of wicked- 
ness? How is it that the greater number, even of 
those who make a profession of piety, pass nearly all 
their lives in gross imperfections, and especially in ex- 
cessive tepidity in God's service ? We desire to correct 
ourselves, and reform others, and yet we do nothing. 
It is as though we saw a miser in want of everything, 
though with gold and silver in abundance. Have you 
asked for this, as you ought, at Mass ? How many 
times have you heard it for this intention ? Will you 
ever persuade me that Almighty God, for so great a 
price, has refused you so trifling a request ? that He 
has esteemed so lightly the Blood and the life of His 
Son, as not to think them equivalent to that grace, that 
virtue, that spiritual or temporal blessing you desire for 
yourself or for another, if it were for your good to grant 
it you ? that you have asked with sincerity for a great 
love of Jesus Christ, and that Jesus Christ has refused 
it to you ? No : I will never believe it, and I am sure 
that you do not yourself believe it. What, then, is the 
reason ? It is that we neglect to assist at Mass, and 
to represent to Almighty God, at that precious and 
acceptable time of salvation, all our miseries, and to 
ask Him the graces which are necessary for us. Lastly, 
it is because we do not offer this adorable Sacrifice like 
persons who believe, and who seriously reflect on what 
they believe. 

H. Practice for the celebration of the Sacrifice of (he Mass. 

If the Priest thoroughly understands the excellence 
of his state, and the sublime sanctity of his ministry, 
he would never approach the Altar but with a holy awe, 
nor depart from it without infinite gratitude. Almighty 
God is more honoured by a single Mass than He can 
be by all the actions of angels and men, however fervent 
and heroic they may be. We ought, therefore, to look 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER in. 



143 



upon this as the greatest and most important action of 
our lives, and to perform it with all possible perfection. 
All the offices with which Almighty God has honoured 
the Angels are inferior in excellence and dignity to this. 
To say Mass is something greater than to govern the 
universe, to raise the dead, and to work the greatest 
miracles. Judge, then, if a preparation or a thanks- 
giving of a quarter of an hour can suffice for so great 
an action. 

Let us prescribe to ourselves whatever rule we please 
in this respect The whole life of a Priest ought to be 
spent in preparation and in thanksgiving. No shorter 
time is sufficient. A Priest ought to do nothing but 
with the thought that he has to say Mass, or that he 
has said it All his words and actions ought to be so 
holy, as to be a preparation for the celebration of the 
divine mysteries, and continual proofs of his gratitude 
and love. There is no one on earth who approaches 
Jesus Christ more closely than the Priest. There is 
no one, therefore, who ought to resemble Him more 
closely in sanctity of life. All other practices are in- 
sufficient Purity and holiness of life must be his 
principal preparation. 

We shall do well, on rising, to recite the prayers 
appointed by the Church, as a preparation for Mass. 
Our thanksgiving should end only with the day. The 
time immediately preceding or following the sacrifice 
should be employed in increasing our recollection, in 
renewing our intentions, in endeavouring to render 
ourselves less unworthy of it ; by deep reflections on 
what we are about to do, or have already done, with 
acts of faith, contrition, humility, thanksgiving, and 
love. 

The Priest, in going to the Altar, iriust no longer 
look upon himself as a man, but as Jesus Christ. It 
is Jesus. Christ who is going to speak by his mouth, 
and immolate Himself by his hands. He should, there- 



Digitized by Google 



144 



THIRD PABT. 



fore, perform no exterior action of which he cannot say, 
€ f this is an action of Jesus Christ." He must observe 
even the smallest ceremonies with the greatest exact- 
ness, if anything can be called small, that is done in 
the celebration of the greatest and most august of all 
sacrifices. He must observe these sacred ceremonies 
with a certain air of grandeur and majesty, and with so 
much modesty that his countenance and his very ap- 
pearance may inspire all with devotion and respect. 
He should offer this adorable Sacrifice in so serious, 
devout, and respectful a manner, that God may be 
honoured, Jesus Christ recognized in the person of His 
minister, and all who are present edified. 

As Jesus Christ immolates and sacrifices Himself by 
the hands of his minister, the minister ought also to 
offer and immolate himself with Jesus Christ. He is 
chosen and, as it were, deputed by the whole Church, 
to offer adoration to God, to thank Him for his benefits, 
to appease His anger, and implore His mercy. He 
ought to discharge his commission with diligence, 
especially after the consecration. Then he ought, like 
Moses, to bind, as it were, the hands of God's justice. 
Then he ought to acknowledge, by means of this precious 
victim, the infinite greatness of the Sovereign Being, 
and annihilate himself above all before Him, as does 
the Son of God on the Altar. Then he ought to repre- 
sent all the wants of his people, convinced that he 
shall obtain all he asks ; since he offers a sacrifice of 
infinite value, which cannot but be pleasing to Almighty 
God. 

. We . need not wonder that the Apostles and Disciples, 
who conversed so familiarly with Jesus Christ, received 
such great graces; we should rather wonder, that a. 
Priest at the Altar is not all powerful, that he loves 
Jesus Christ only imperfectly, that he is wanting in 
devotion, when he offers this adorable Sacrifice. He is 
with Jesus Christ, when he pleases, and as long as lie: 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER III. 



145 



pleases, but unhappily he does not wish to be long with 
Him. We sometimes lament, that when we are at the 
Altar, we feel no tenderness, or sensible devotion. But do 
we live in great interior recollection ? Do we lead a life 
sufficiently pure ? How can we experience this sensi- 
ble devotion, when we are in continual motion during 
the time of the holy Sacrifice, entirely taken up with 
the external action, and so eager to quit the Altar, that 
we do not give time to Jesus Christ, or allow Him, as 
it were, to make us feel the sweet effects of His pre- 
sence, much less to make His voice heard by us ? 

A little more faith ; a few serious reflections on our 
ministry will easily teach us, how we ought to say 
Mass. We must endeavour to say Mass as Jesus 
Christ would say it. This reflection on the Person of 
Jesus Christ embodies in itself the holiest practices of 
devotion. This thought, which we should recall to 
mind from time to time at the Altar, " I here repre- 
sent Jesus Christ, I speak in the name of Jesus Christ, 
I hold in my hands Jesus Christ," is well fitted to in- 
spire us with that air of sanctity, that serious and 
majestic manner, that divine appearance which this 
action calls for, and which all who are present at it 
expect from us. 

The devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus is a 
powerful means of helping us to say Mass with more 
devotion. Whether it be that this object is more cal- 
culated to move us, or that Jesus Christ has attached 
to this devotion, special and abundant graces, it is cer- 
tain, from the experience of those who practise it, that, 
as soon as persons begin to be earnest in devotion to 
the Sacred Heart, great devotion at the Altar is the 
immediate result. The mere thought of the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus, inspires sentiments, with which we 
were before entirely unacquainted. Faith grows stron- 
ger, and our love for Jesus Christ sensibly increases. 

We must only be mindful, first, to say Mass with 

L 



Digitized by Google 



146 



THIRD PART. 



attention and without hurry. Eagerness to quit the 
Altar, is a clear sign that we do not willingly remain 
with Jesus Christ. We are only required to spend 
a few moments longer at the Altar, and shall we, for so 
little, deprive ourselves, during our whole life, of the 
benefit of the greatest, the holiest, and the most im- 
portant of all our actions. 2dly. To make, every time 
we say Mass, a sort of reparation of honour to Jesus 
Christ, with a view to atone, by the homage we render 
Him in this august Sacrament, for the insults and out- 
rages, which He has endured, and still endures in the 
most Blessed Sacrament. Srdly. To thank Him for all 
the benefits, and all the graces, which He has bestowed 
on the Blessed Virgin. This gratitude is very pleasing 
to Him. 4thly. To ask Him with all simplicity and 
entire confidence for many things, and especially for His 
perfect love. " Lord, make me holy. The glory will be 
Thine. Thou wilt find elsewhere subjects mere worthy 
of Thy graces, than I am, but I dare to say, that Thou 
wilt not find any one, who will endeavour to be more 
grateful. Inverri quern diligit anima mea, tenui mm, 
nec dimittam. Permit me, oh Lord to say to Thee, 
that however great may be the benefits Thou hast 
granted me, Thou hast not yet given me enough, if thou 
hast not given me Thy love. Give me, my divine 
Saviour, a heart like Thine. Give me Thy Heart" 
Truly, a Priest, who does not feel the effects of a 
sacrifice, which has power to cancel the sins of the 
whole world, has great reason to fear. My God ! what 
graces dost Thou not shower on a well-disposed soul ! 
Who can explain the sweetness that Thou makest us 
experience at the Altar. " I have received such great 
graces, and have felt so sensibly, the effects of this 
Bread of Angels," says a person who was truly devout 
to the sacred Heart of Jesus, " That I cannot think of 
them, without being at the same time, touched with 
sensible gratitude. I have conceived in consequence, 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER in. 



147 



a strong confidence, that I will persevere in virtue, 
and in die desire I have of belonging entirely to God, 
notwithstanding the immense difficulties, which I re- 
present to myself in the course of my life. I will say 
Mass every day. This is my hope. This is the only 
foundation of my support. Jesus Christ can do very 
little, if He cannot sustain me, from one day to 
another. He will not fail to reproach me with my 
want of courage, if I begin to despond. He will give 
me every day fresh counsel and fresh strength. He 
will instruct, console, and encourage me, and grant 
me, through the sacrifice of Himself, all the graces 
that I ask. If I do not see that He is present, I feel 
it. It seems to me, that I am like those blind men, 
who threw themselves at His feet, and had no doubt 
< that they touched Him, though they did not see Him." 
This is the manner, in which we ought to say Mass ; 
such are the sentiments we ought to have in the pre- 
sence of Jesus Christ. 

III. Practice for assisting at the Sacrifice of the Mass. 

Those, who hear Mass, should be convinced, that 
there is no action of their lives, which requires more 
respect, attention, and devotion, than this. The Mass 
is, truly, the representation of the Sacrifice of the 
Cross, and at the same time, the true sacrifice of the 
same victim, Who was immolated on Calvary. In the 
Mass, Jesus Christ still offers Himself to His Father 
as a holocaust for the expiation of our sins, and 
applies to us, the price of the Blood which He shed for 
us on the Cross. We ought, on this account, to assist 
at Mass, in the same sentiments, as those we should 
have had, had we been present at the death of our 
Lord on Calvary. Or rather, we should endeavour to 
enter into the sentiments of His Blessed Mother, and 
His beloved disciple at that time. 

Modesty, interior recollection, silence, a humble 

l 2 



Digitized by Google 



148 



THIRD PART. 



posture, and a profound respect, are necessary dis- 
positions ; but they would be useless, unless animated 
by a lively faith. We must believe, and we must often 
reflect on what we believe. We are in a place, sanc- 
tified by the presence of Jesus Christ, and filled with 
the majesty of God, to Whom we are come to offer our 
homage, and to ask from Him the graces we require. 
We assist at a sacrifice, in which Jesus Christ is the 
Victim. This sacrifice is offered for us. Is it pos- 
sible that we should be convinced of this, and not feel 
respect and confidence? We should carefully avoid 
whatever might distract us, from attending to all the 
actions of the Priest. Of all methods of hearing Mass, 
this is the most conformable to the spirit of the Church. 
Vocal prayers are very useful, when they are said with 
devotion. But they should not occupy us, all the time* 
of Mass. Wo should not be always intent on speaking. 
We should sometimes cease, and listen, to hear what 
our Lord says to us. We must imitate the poor, who, 
after stretching out their hands, and making known 
their wants, remain in silence, waiting till an alms 
be given them. This silence during the adorable 
Sacrifice is not idleness, it is the mark of a deep atten- 
tion to the presence of God, and of a humble confidence 
in His mercy. A few serious reflections on what is 
done at the Altar, a few acts of faith in the truth 
of this mystery, will produce in us the holiest sen- 
timents. 

But of all methods of hearing Mass, none is more 
useful than that which is taught us by devotion to the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus. It consists chiefly in interior 
acts. As soon as the Priest has consecrated, animated 
with lively faith, we must adore Jesus Christ, and adore 
Him in the sentiments of a person, who is present only 
to render Him homage, and make Him a sort of repa- 
ration of honour, for all the insults and outrages, 
to which His love has exposed Him, in this august 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER III. 



149 



Sacrament. We must then adore His Sacred Heart, 
and thank our Divine Saviour, for the love which in- 
flames His Sacred Heart, and for all the admirable 
dispositions of His Heart towards us. We must then 
enter into His Divine Heart, to admire all the treasures 
of virtue and of grace which It contains. We shall there 
admire the most profound humility, that it is possible 
to imagine: an heroic patience, undismayed by any 
misfortune : an excessive meekness towards all : the 
infinite grief He felt for our sins, which He vouchsafed 
to take upon Himself. We shall behold an unbounded 
love for the glory of God, His Father, and for all mankind, 
a solicitude, a zeal, an excessive eagerness for their 
salvation, and for mine in particular. We must repre- 
sent to ourselves, what are the sentiments of Jesus 
Christ on that Altar, at the sight of so much contempt 
and so many outrages. Filled with the deepest sen- 
timents of love and gratitude, we must say to Him all 
that grief and love can suggest to a generous and 
grateful heart. By these interior acts, we shall dispose 
ourselves for a spiritual Communion. This consists, 
chiefly, in an ardent desire of really communicating, in 
order to repair, by the respectful and loving manner in 
which we desire to receive Jesus Christ, for the cold- 
ness, the insensibility, and little preparation, with 
which we have hitherto received Him. 

It is extraordinary that there are to be found Chris- 
tians, and those not a few, who grow weary and do not 
know what to do at Mass. Can a sick man be tired of 
seeing the efforts made to cure him ? or can a person, 
loaded with debts, find it difficult to know what to do, 
in presence of a powerful monarch who has offered 
him all his treasures ? You do not know what to do at 
Mass ? How is this ? says Fr. la Colombiere, in his 
Reflections on this subject; have you never received 
any favour from God ? Alas, we are surrounded, loaded, 
overwhelmed with His benefits, and we have never 



Digitized by Google 



150 



THIRD PART. 



thanked Him as we ought. At Mass, at least, give a 
thought to these various benefits ; so many sins over- 
looked, so loving a Providence continually exercised in 
your regard, so sweet and so constant an effort to draw 
you to Him, to gain your heart, to make you holy. 
The graces that you receive in one single day would 
suffice to occupy you during the whole of Mass. Is 
not all this deserving of your remembrance? After 
repassing through your mind all these benefits, say 
with holy confidence to the Eternal Father : " Lord, 
these are the benefits I have received from Thee. But 
Thou seest this Host, this divine Body, this precious 
Blood, this adorable Sacrifice ? This is what I offer 
Thee for so many benefits. I cannot doubt but that 
they are well repaid by so magnificent an offering. 
But what can I render Thee, oh Lord, for having 
given me the means of acknowledging so liberally the 
benefits of Thy Father, the means of expiating ail my 
sins ? I have only one heart to offer Thee. Wilt Thou 
deign to accept this heart, agitated by so many passions, 
and defiled with so many sins ? It is at least broken 
with grief, and in this state I offer it to Thee. Thou 
openest to me Thine own ; shall I dare, my loving 
Saviour, to refuse Thee mine? 0 God of majesty! 
who am I, that Thou shouldst deign to accept the 
sacrifice of my heart? It shall then be all Thine. 
Creatures shall have no part in it. Do Thou, then, 
my loving Jesus, be my Father, my friend, my Lord, 
my All. Since Thou art pleased to be content with my 
heart, how can it desire anything but Thine ? I wish, 
in future, to live only for Thee. Receive then, oh 
loving Saviour of the world, the sacrifice made to Thee 
by the most ungrateful of mankind, to repair the 
injury which, up to this time, I have not ceased to do 
Thee by offending Thee." 

You do not know what to do at Mass ? Have you 
never offended God ? Do you not offend Him every 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTBB IV. 



151 



day, and every hour of the day ? Run over, during 
Mass, all the faults you have committed since the Mass 
of the preceding day, and ask His pardon for them. 
But do you want nothing ? You complain every day of 
your parents, your friends, your children: ask then 
Almighty God to make such a one more reasonable, 
another more modest, another less exasperated ; to 
change the heart of another, to grant yourself more 
meekness, more patience, more courage and more zeal 
for your salvation, and above all, His perfect love. To 
obtain all these graces, offer to Him Jesus Christ as a 
sacrifice. He can never refuse your requests. For 
what you offer is worth infinitely more than all that 
you can ask for. 

It is extraordinary that our Lord can fill His house 
only by using violence, and forcing us, as it were, to 
enter. But it is still more extraordinary that we should 
enter the house of God so often, and assist every day at 
the most august of all sacrifices, and yet draw no fruit 
from it We do not even understand the ineffable ad- 
vantages which we can derive from it. This ignorance 
and negligence is one of the things we have most reason 
to deplore among Christians. What a misfortune, that 
we possess in the midst of us an immense and inex- 
haustible treasure, and that, from not being aware of 
it, we live in indigence ! But if we know this treasure, 
and yet derive no benefit from it, are we not still more 
to be pitied ? 

Chapter IV. 

Practical reflections on Communion. 

As the Blessed Eucharist is the greatest and the most 
august of our sacraments, the frequenting it is the 
most important action of our life, and consequently 
requires the greatest care and application in preparing 



Digitized by Google 



152 



THIRD PART. 



for it. Were we to communicate only once in our life, 
our whole life, however long it might be, would not be 
too long to prepare ourselves worthily for receiving so 
holy and so awful a mystery. This should not, how- 
ever, keep us from it. It should only urge us to ap- 
proach it with the requisite dispositions. We are 
wrong, then, when we say : " I will not communicate, 
because I feel I am unworthy." We should say, on 
the contrary : " I will endeavour, as far as possible, by 
the innocence and regularity of my life, to make myself 
worthy to communicate." To approach worthily, is to 
believe ourselves unworthy ; whilst, at the same time, 
we do what we can to make ourselves less unworthy. 
A single good Communion is enough to make a Saint. 
Not much more is necessary than a good will, and a few 
reflections, in order to make a good Communion. 

Those who communicate often without becoming 
more devout, more mortified, more recollected, without 
loving Jesus Christ more and more, are in a more 
dangerous state than they think. What would have 
been said, if those who often conversed with Jesus 
Christ, and usually ate at His table, had not become 
daily more virtuous ? What further hope would there 
have been for those sick persons who were presented 
to Jesus Christ, if Jesus Christ had not cured them? 
Famine and dearth are not the severest chastisements 
with which God punishes His people. The most ter- 
rible, says the Prophet, is when He threatens so to 
chastise us, that we die of hunger in the midst of an 
abundant harvest. Many bunches of grapes shall be 
pressed, and they shall not yield a drop of wine : Au- 
feram robur panis (Isaiah iii. 1). This is the most 
fearful of all punishments; the bread you eat shall 
have no more nourishment for you. You shall eat 
much, and yet die of languor and weakness. You shall 
die of hunger. Whatever may be our danger from sick- 
ness, there is always some hope as long as we can have 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



153 



recourse to the last remedies. But when the most 
violent have been several times tried without effect, 
what must we think of the sick person ? If we were 
ill, and had repeatedly tried the most powerful remedies 
without effect, we should be filled with alarm, and con- 
sider our death inevitable. We have repeatedly received 
the adorable Body and the precious Blood of Jesus 
Christ without profit. Have we reason to be satisfied ? 
There are many fatal causes from which this misfortune 
may proceed. Each one should examine himself on 
this point. 

The general dispositions which we ought to bring to 
Communion are: profound humility and a sincere 
acknowledgment of our poverty ; a certain spiritual 
hunger, which indicates, at the same time, the need 
we have of this food, and our good dispositions to profit 
by it ; a great purity of heart, an ardent love of Jesus 
Christ, or at least an ardent desire of loving Him, and 
of accomplishing the design which He had in giving 
Himself to us in the Eucharist — namely, to unite us 
intimately to Him by a perfect conformity of heart and 
mind. Those who, at Communion, have no sentiment 
of devotion, no fervour, no tenderness, are certainly 
without some of these dispositions. 

It is an ordinary defect in those who communicate 
often not to make much preparation for communicating 
well. All books contain very useful practices of devo- 
tion for Communion. Each one can choose what suits 
him best. Devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
is suited to all. Experience teaches that there is, per- 
haps, no practice which makes us communicate with 
more devotion. All these practices should be accom- 
panied, by serious and deep reflections, on the admirable 
qualities of the divine food which we are about to 
receive, by generous mortification, by the gifts of the 
Holy Ghost, which are the rewards of perfect mortifiV 
cation ; and lastly, by the imitation of the virtues we 



Digitized by Google 



154 



THIRD PART. 



admire and love in Jesus Christ Let us imagine that 
the Communion, for which we are preparing, is to be 
the last in our lives. Let us prepare, every time, as 
though, on quitting the holy table, we had to pass from 
this life to eternity. If we desire that the sacrament 
of the Eucharist should produce in us sentiments of 
the love of God, let us think of the immense love which 
God has shown us in instituting this mystery, and of 
His design to oblige us thereby to love Him perfectly. 
The reproof of Jesus Christ to Martha for too great 
solicitude, should teach some souls, who are disquieted 
and wholly taken up with reciting many vocal prayers, 
that tranquillity of heart, interior recollection and at- 
tention in listening, from time to time, to Jesus Christ 
in silence, like Magdalen, is the best preparation we 
can make. So that we should employ the greater part 
of the precious time that precedes, accompanies and 
immediately follows Communion, in making many in- 
terior acts, of which the love of Jesus Christ should be 
the principle, and the increase of this love the chief 
effect Let us say some prayers before Communion, 
but let us spend at least a quarter of an hour in 
making profound reflections on the action we are about 
to perform. It is ^ery difficult for a person to be con- 
vinced that he is going to receive Jesus Christ, and 
yet to have no desire of it, not to think of it, and to be 
but little impressed with it The presence of a prince 
in disguise does not in any degree diminish the respect 
due to Him on the part of those who really believe him 
to be the prince. Any signal benefit, any mark of friend- 
ship he may show us under this condition, obliges us to 
love him all the more, especially if he has assumed this 
disguise in order to render us some important service. 
Let us apply this to Jesus Christ Oh Jerusalem, if 
thou didst but know who He is that comes to visit thee, 
and the benefits thou canst derive from this visit! 
Consider particularly that you are about to receive the 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



155 



adorable Body of Jesus Christ, with the sacred wounds 
which He allowed His disciples to touch ; and with this 
adorable Body you are going to receive His Sacred 
Heart. Into this Sacred Heart, Which is open to us, 
we must enter. In this Sacred Heart we must learn 
to pray, to thank God, to praise Him, to annihilate 
ourselves in His presence, but above all, to love Him. 
What wonders does not Jesus Christ work during these 
precious moments in a pure soul, in a soul that really 
loves Him. The mere thought of this divine Heart 
fills us, at that time, with extraordinary devotion. If 
Jesus Christ, in coming to us, gives us sensible marks 
of His presence, as is generally the case with those 
who have a tender devotion to His Sacred Heart, let us 
profit by these precious moments, let us preserve great 
interior recollection, let us listen to our Lord, let us 
allow grace to work. If we do not hinder its operation 
by voluntary distractions, and a kind of dissipation by 
which the devil seeks to make us lose all the fruit of 
Communion, it will work wonders in us. 

The occupation of a fervent soul at this time, should 
be principally, to abandon herself entirely to the love 
of her Divine Saviour, and to enjoy the sweetness of 
His presence. A tender and sincere love is, at the 
same time, the best disposition for Communion, and 
the chief fruit we should draw from it. A soul that 
loves much is generally silent in the presence of Jesus 
Christ, and shows her love for him, by fervent interior 
acts. Magdalen lost in admiration at our Saviour's 
feet, is the model of a soul that has communicated. 
If she speaks, her words must only be expressions of 
her love, her admiration, and her joy. 

We may say from time to time, " Invent quern diligit 
anima mea, tenui eum, nec dimittam. I have found 
Him Whom my soul loveth. I have held Him, and I 
will never separate myself from Him." At other times, 
" Deus mem et omnia ; My God and my All. Dilectus 



Digitized by Google 



156 



THIRD PART. 



meus mihi, et ego iUi ; My beloved to me, and I to Him. 
Quid mihi est in ccelo, et a te quid volui super terrain, 
Deus cordis mei, et pars mea Deus in ceternum. What 
have I in Heaven ? and besides Thee, what do I desire 
upon Earth ? The God of my heart, and the God that 
is my portion for ever. Pone me ut signaculum super 
cor tuum. Put me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal 
upon thy arm." We must endeavour at that time, to 
enter into the sentiments of Jesus Christ, and con- 
sider what displeases Him in us, what are His designs 
upon us, what He wills we should do, and what can 
hinder us in future from doing what He desires. Let 
us remain in spirit at His feet, and renewing from 
time to time, our faith in the presence of Jesus Christ, 
let us adore Him with profound respect, mingled with 
fear, seeing that this God of Majesty, before Whom the 
Seraphim tremble, humbles Himself as far as to dwell 
in the heart of a mortal man and a sinner : that for 
this purpose. He destroys the laws of nature, and works 
such stupendous miracles. Then passing from sen- 
timents of admiration to those of gratitude, let us, with 
a sense of our absolute incapability of testifying it 
sufficiently to our Lord, invite all creatures to bless 
Him with us. Let us offer to Him the love which all 
the Blessed feel for Him, and the fervour with which 
so many holy souls communicate. Let us offer Him, 
His own Heart, with the immense love that inflames it. 
Let us then unfold to Him, with great confidence and 
sincerity, our weaknesses, our miseries, and our wants. 
Ecce quern amas infirmatur, we may say with Martha : 
"Alas, Lord ! he whom Thou lovest so tenderly, is sick. 
Can I doubt of Thy love, after all Thou hast done for 
me, and all that Thou now dost ? If thou lovest me, 
canst Thou see my infirmities and not heal them? 
But, above all, canst Thou see that I love Thee so 
little, without inflaming my heart with the sacred fire 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



157 



of Thy love? Even though Thou shouldst refuse me all 
the rest, couldst Thou deny me Thy perfect love ? I 
know that I have put great obstacles to Thy designs 
in my behalf. But do Thou begin, Thyself, I beg of 
Thee, by removing those obstacles." 

Let us never fail, at each Communion that we make, 
to offer some pleasing sacrifice to Jesus Christ. Let 
us promise Him to apply ourselves to correct some 
defect, which we know to be greatly displeasing to Him. 
Let us bear in mind, that we shall never feel the sen- 
sible effects of Communion, if we are net careful to 
spend the rest of the day, in great interior recollection. 
Coldness, sloth, and dissipation of mind, immediately 
after Communion, can never be habitual in those who 
communicate often, without being, at the same time, 
fatal signs of the unhappy state of a soul, which is 
insensible to the greatest of all benefits, and has 
therefore the more reason to fear, in proportion as she 
has less apprehension of the unhappy state of tepidity, 
in which she lives, and of the false security with which 
she seeks to tranquillize herself. 

St. Bonaventure (Process vii., Kelig. c. 12,) dis- 
tinguishes eight different motives, which may lead the 
faithful to receive holy Communion. Some communi- 
cate, says this holy Doctor, because, being sensible of 
their infirmities, they are desirous of being visited by 
the physician, Who alone has power to cure them. 
Others, because, having sinned greatly, they have 
nothing to offer, more acceptable to the Divine justice, 
than this sacred Host, this Immaculate Lamb, Who 
takes away the sins of the world. Others, oppressed 
with grief, or attacked by violent temptations, because, 
there is no one to whom they can have recourse, but 
to a strong and powerful God, Who is always ready to 
assist and defend them. Others, because they desire 
to obtain some grace from the Eternal Father, and 
hope to obtain it, through the merits of His Son, our 



Digitized by Google 



158 



THIRD PART. 



only Mediator. Some have no other intention in this 
holy action, but to offer our Lord the chalice of salva- 
tion, out of gratitude for the benefits they have received 
from His hand. Many desire to honour God and His 
Saints, by making this oblation to God, in honour of his 
Saints. Some, urged by charity for their brethren, 
living or dead, make use of the Blood of Jesus Christ, 
to obtain, for the living, the pardon of their sins, and 
for the dead, relief in their sufferings. Lastly, others, 
inflamed with a sincere desire of loving our Blessed 
Saviour, receive Him in the Adorable Eucharist, in 
order that they may be wholly inflamed with His love. 
This motive, we may say, is the most perfect, and the 
most conformable to the designs of Jesus Christ, in 
giving Himself to us. 

Our divine Saviour comes to us, in order to unite us 
closely to Him. He opens His Heart to us, He gives 
it to us : shall we dare to refuse Him ours ? Let us 
enter into this loving Heart, and as It comes to us, let 
It in future take the place of our own, that we may no 
longer have any sentiments but His. But let us enter 
well into these sentiments. Let us consider what 
Jesus Christ loves, what He esteems, and what He 
despises. We cannot doubt that He judges wisely of 
things, and that we deceive ourselves, when we judge 
differently from Him. What idea, then, has He of 
those honours, those riches, those pleasures, which I 
as passionately seek after ? On the contrary, are not 
. those crosses, which I abhor, the object of His com- 
placency ? They are the only objects of His esteem. 

By such reflections as these, it will be easy for us to 
ascertain whether the Heart of Jesus Christ be united 
to ours, whether we have truly the spirit of Jesus 
Christ. We will explain the matter more fully. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER V. 



159 



Chapter V. 

What are the marks of the perfect love of Jesus Christ, 
and of true devotion to His Sacred Heart. 

Marks of a true love for Jesus Christ are the qualities, 
opposite to the defects, we have enumerated above, in 
the second Chapter of the second Part. Jesus Christ 
is the object, and at the same time, the source of solid 
virtue. He is also the most perfect model. Whatever 
is not conformed to His example, does not deserve the 
name of virtue. There is little doubt, but that the 
imperfections noticed in devout persons have done great 
injury to solid piety. Some, who pass for devout, are 
observed to be full of self-love, puffed up with self- 
esteem, and ready to resent the smallest slights. Some, 
appear continually melancholy, obstinate, anxious, and 
sometimes, even furious with passion. Others there 
are whom, at the same time that they are in want of 
nothing, the fear of injuring their health in the slightest 
degree renders idle, negligent, useless, excessively 
indulgent to themselves, and always severe with others. 
Hence it is, that many are in the habit of looking at 
virtue only, through the imperfections of those, who 
pass for spiritual persons. They think, that no one 
can be devout, without being melancholy, secluded, 
obstinate, troublesome, a lover of himself, and ex- 
ceedingly disagreeable. The high esteem in which 
true piety was once held, is lost in consequence of the 
low idea which is formed of it. The most licentious 
have persuaded themselves that it was no great mis- 
fortune to be deprived of virtue, when they see it 
united with so many defects in the greater number, who 
make profession of it. Although the imperfections of 
some afford no real excuse for the vices of others, they 
tend, without doubt, to disgust many. Dissatisfied with 
a life so little in accordance with the idea, which had 



Digitized by Google 



160 



THIRD PART. 



been presented to them of devotion, they imagined, 
either, that the virtue of those who really love Jesus 
Christ is not true, or that it is impossible to practise 
true virtue. We do not undertake here to refute so 
false an opinion. The Saints overthrow it sufficiently 
by the sanctity of their lives, and we will content our- 
selves with showing, in a few words, who are the 
solidly virtuous, by giving the sure marks of true 
devotion, and describing the character of a person who 
loves Jesus Christ perfectly. 

I. Character of one who has a true love for Jesus Christ 

The description given us by St. Paul is the most just 
and natural. The true love of Jesus Christ, says this 
Apostle, without which, even though we had given our 
property to feed the poor, and our bodies to be burnt, 
we should have done nothing, is patient, is kind, is not 
envious, is not rash nor inconsiderate, is not puffed 
up with pride, is not disdainful; seeks not its own 
interests, is not provoked to anger, thinks no evil; 
bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, 
ensures all things. This is the true description of solid 
virtue and devotion. If one only of these qualities is 
wanting, devotion is imperfect ; there is an imperfect 
love of Jesus Christ. Hence, a person of solid virtue, 
one who truly loves Jesus Christ, is one without self- 
love, without disguise, without ambition ; one who is, 
at all times, severe to himself, pardoning himself no- 
thing, and thoroughly kind to others, in whose favour 
he excuses everything ; affable, without affectation ; con- 
descending, without baseness ; obliging, without interest ; 
strictly exact, though without being scrupulous ; con- 
stantly united to God, without constraint ; never idle, 
yet never appearing too busily engaged; never too 
much occupied, and yet less distracted in business 
than others, because he keeps his heart free., occupying 
it only with its great affair, the affair of its salvation. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER V. 



161 



Full of a low opinion of himself, he has nothing but 
esteem for others; for he beholds in them only the 
virtues they possess, and in himself only his own 
defects. Supernatural maxims his only guide, he 
thinks that those who despise him do him no injury, 
because he does not consider the honour which they 
refuse him to be his due. Lastly, he is never in ill- 
humour, because he has always what he desires. As 
he never desires what he has not, he is always content, 
always peaceful, always equal. Prosperity does not 
puff him up, and misfortunes, however severe, do not 
cast him down, because he knows that from the same 
Hand come the goods and evils of life. As the will of 
God is his only rule of life, he always does what God 
wills, and wills always what God does. 

On this account, actions which make most noise 
have no attraction for him. Convinced that what we 
do has no merit, except so far as it is conformable to 
what God wills, he does not trouble himself to do much, 
provided he does perfectly what is pleasing to His sove- 
reign Lord. For this reason, full of diffidence in his 
own natural disposition, his inclinations and his self- 
love, he prefers the smallest duties of his state to the 
greatest actions of his own choice and taste. Animated 
by this spirit of Jesus Christ, he is as perfectly resigned 
in the privation of those talents which it has not pleased 
God to give him, of the virtues which God does not call 
him to practise, and of the good which He does not 
require him to do, as he is faithful in receiving the 
graces God offers him, in practising the virtues, and in 
doing the good works, of which He gives him the oppor- 
tunity, and grants him the desire. Lastly, he is one 
who distinguishes himself from others by his meekness, 
his humility, his ardent love for Jesus Christ, his tender 
affection for the Blessed Virgin, and by a certain ap- 
pearance of modesty and odour of sanctity which never 
fails to be recognized and admired. He is one whom 

M 



Digitized by Google 



162 



THIRD PART. 



the use of the Sacraments continually makes more 
holy, and who is constantly more and more inflamed 
with that thirst after justice of which Jesus Christ 
speaks. Full of faith, he never assists at our sacred 
mysteries without the deepest sentiments of gratitude, 
of love, and profound respect. He seeks God without 
interruption and without dissimulation. He knows not 
what it is to he sparing with a God, Who gives us all, 
Who gives Himself wholly to us, without reserve, in 
order to oblige us to refuse Him nothing. In fine, he 
is one who is perfectly mortified at all times, at every 
period of life, and in all conditions, because he is con- 
vinced that in all things Jesus Christ crucified is his 
model For this reason, full of His spirit, he aims at 
nothing but directing, on every occasion, both in prayer 
and in action, all his intentions and all his thoughts to 
the simple view of God, Who is the sole object that 
occupies him. He centres in God all the motions o£ 
his heart by a simple and loving resignation to His 
holy will. This is the character of true and solid 
virtue which Jesus Christ Himself has given us, which 
all the Saints have so well copied in their lives, and 
which alone has constituted the sanctity and the merit 
of all the Saints. This is the faithful portrait of one 
who has a true love for Jesus Christ. From this we ; 
see at once how false it is that true virtue is disagree- 
able and forbidding ; that persons of solid piety are 
unaccommodating, melancholy, impatient, troublesome, 
full of self-love, jealousy, and ambition. It will appear 
yet moire clearly what an injury is done to true piety, 
and what prejudice is created in the minds of the faith- 
ful, by those who, with a reputation for devotion, 
nourish in themselves such serious imperfections, and 
throw discredit by their defects upon the virtue which 
is attributed to them, and thus make their own example 
serve as a kind of pretext to the licentious. Let it not 
be said, that this perfect love of Jesus Christ, that true 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER V. 



163 



piety as here described, has no existence but in idea ; 
or that if it really exists in the world, a life regulated 
by such maxims must be necessarily very singular, and 
that any one who lives in this manner must be very 
unhappy. The life and the spirit of all the Saints is 
itself the model from which this description has been 
taken. There is not one who, by leading a life in ac- 
cordance with this idea, has not enjoyed a peace and 
joy beyond all conception. If many among such as 
seem most circumspect cannot be recognized from this 
description, it is because many of those who profess 
piety have not courage to do all that is necessary to 
attain this height of perfection. They make some 
efforts. They even make some progress in the path of 
piety. B ut they generally stop half way, and many who 
seem to have hardly a step to make, deprive themselves 
of all the advantages of a life of perfection, from not 
having courage to take this step. 

But most persons, says St. Francis of Sales, form to 
themselves a false idea of devotion. You find few who 
do not represent it to themselves in accordance with 
their humour, their natural disposition, and their pas- 
sions. A person subject to melancholy makes solid 
virtue consist in leading a secluded life, and cannot 
imagine that any one can be always cheerful, and at the 
same time truly devout. Others, looking only at the 
exterior, in the spiritual life, make it consist in exterior 
penances, in hairshirts, fasting, watching, and similar 
macerations of the body. Many imagine they have 
attained consummate virtue when they have acquired 
the habit of reciting long vocal prayers, of hearing 
many Masses, of assisting at the whole divine office, of 
remaining a long time in the Church, or of frequently 
communicating. Some, even among those who serve 
God in religion, think that to be perfect (La Colomb. 
B. sp. ch. 1) it suffices to be assiduous in the choir, to 
love retirement and silence, to be faithful in observing 

m 2 



Digitized by Google 



164 



THIRD PABT. 



religious discipline. Thus, some place perfection in 
one exercise, and some in another. But it is certain 
that they all deceive themselves. For, as exterior 
works are only either dispositions for becoming per- 
fectly holy, or the fruits of perfect sanctity, it cannot 
be said that Christian perfection or the perfect love of 
God consists solely in works of this kind. They may 
be excellent fruits of consummate virtue in truly holy 
persons. But they may be very injurious to those who 
become so attached to them, as to neglect to watch over 
the motions of their hearts, to occupy themselves with 
true interior mortification, and to conform their will, in 
all things, to that of God. 

The true love of God — in other words, true devotion, 
and the spiritual life — properly consists, as we have 
seen, in loving God, and hating ourselves; in sub- 
mitting ourselves, not only to Him, but to every crea- 
ture for the love of Him ; in entirely renouncing our 
own will to follow His ; in mortifying pride and self- 
love ; and, above all, in doing all this solely for the 
glory of His name, without any other design but to 
please Him ; for the sole reason that He desires and 
merits to be loved and served by His creatures. This 
is what is contained in the law of love, which the Holy 
Spirit has engraved in the hearts of the just It is in 
this manner that we are to practise that abnegation of 
ourselves so much recommended by our Blessed Saviour 
in the Gospel. It is this that makes His yoke so sweet, 
and His burden so light. 

Not every one that saith to me, Lord, Lord, says the 
Son of God, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but 
lie that doth the will of my Father Who is in heaven. 
Many, continues our divine Master, will say to me in 
that day, Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in Thy 
Name ? and cast out devils in Thy Name ? and done 
many miracles in Thy Name ? And He will say to them 
in a loud voice : " I never knew you ; depart from me.'* 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER V. 



165 



This is a good but severe lesson for those who labour 
much, and even with success, for the salvation of souls, 
should they, after guiding others to sublime perfection, 
be so unhappy as to go on creeping all their lives, and 
to die in the great imperfections in which they have lived. 

It would be well if we were thoroughly convinced 
that the love of Jesus Christ, true devotion, Christian 
virtue, and solid piety properly consist in sincere 
humility, universal and constant mortification, and 
perfect conformity of our will to the will of God. If 
any one of these three virtues be wanting, all the rest 
is mere deceit and affectation. There is no devotion. 
There can be no virtue. 

This is the opinion of the Apostle, and of all the 
masters of the spiritual life. Or rather, it is the 
opinion of all true Christians, for it is the sentiment 
of Christ Himself. It must consequently be the sen- 
timent of all who have the true spirit of Jesus Christ. 
In our designs and undertakings, says a great servant 
of God, it is better to propose to ourselves, to do the 
will of God, than to procure the glory of God. For, by 
doing God's will, we infallibly procure His glory also. 
But, in proposing to ourselves the glory of God, as the 
motive of our actions, we are sometimes deceived, and 
do our own will under the specious pretext of the glory 
of God. This delusion is not uncommon in those who 
employ themselves in good works and in ministering 
to the salvation of souls. True perfection, which is 
open to no deception, is to fulfil in all things the holy 
will of God. But there are very few souls sufficiently 
enlightened to know the excellence of this perfection, 
as there are also few who experience the happiness 
which results from it. 

God has loved us too much, says a faithful friend of 
Jesus Christ, to allow of our being niggardly towards 
Him. The mere thought of not being wholly His 
should horrify us. Shall I not belong wholly to God, 



Digitized by Google 



166 



THIRD FAST. 



after the mercy He daily shows me ? Shall I refuse 
Him anything, seeing that I have received all from 
Him ? My heart will not allow it. When I think of 
the little we can do for God, even though we devote 
ourselves wholly to His service, I hlush at the thought 
of refusing Him anything. We are not safe in taking 
a middle course. We very soon fall lower and lower. 
None but those who give themselves to God without 
reserve can hope to die with consolation. They alone 
can promise themselves a life of tranquillity and joy. 
We see how completely the life and the sentiments of 
the true servants of God agree with the character we 
have drawn of the true servant of God, and what sweet- 
ness they experience. Those who, from want of true 
devotion, have never tasted these heavenly consolations, 
imagine that it is the same with those who are truly 
devout, and who have a true love for Jesus Christ* 
But they deceive themselves. 

We may judge also how far removed from the true 
love of Jesus Christ, and from real piety, are certain 
persons who adopt its practices exteriorly, and never 
cease talking about it ; persons who are devout through 
whim, impulse, or caprice ; whom an affliction or a 
retreat may keep for two or three days in recollection, 
without, however, making them more holy or less 
imperfect ; persons who refuse nothing to their senses, 
who perform the holiest exercises in a purely natural 
manner, who are continually distracted, f whose heart is 
always open to foreign objects, exposed to the assaults 
of the enemy, agitated by a thousand passions, always 
troubled, and rarely ever without some disturbance; 
persons whose sensitiveness is so excessive, that the 
slightest thing offends them ; full of disguise and subter- 
fuge, never acting but through self-love, never attain- 
ing their end but by manoeuvring and deceit, and 
varying in humour every hour because they only follow 
the different emotions of their passions. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER V. 



167 



We may easily see that such persons have not the 
spirit of Jesus Christ ; that their virtue is only outside ; 
and that as long as they persevere in this unhappy 
state, their devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus will 
he too imperfect to merit for them an entrance into that 
divine Heart, or at least to dwell there long. 

IL Effects of the perfect love of Jesus Christ. 

From what has been already said, it will easily he 
understood, that the ordinary effects of the perfect love 
of Jesus Christ, may be reduced to this ; that it forms 
in us a resemblance to this divine model, as far as is 
possible in this life, by a perfect imitation of His 
admirable virtues; so that our exterior and interior 
life becomes a true copy of His ; and, as He is the 
living image of God the Father, so we also become 
His living images, by copying in ourselves, the features 
of His life, His mysteries, and His virtues. We easily 
imitate what we love much. Our perfect imitation of 
Jesus Christ shows itself in an unalterable meekness, 
in a perfect liberty of spirit, in an entire dependence 
on Jesus Christ in all our actions, and in a great love 
of the Cross. 

Such are the ordinary effects of the true love of our 
Divine Saviour ; and in proportion as our love is more 
ardent and tender, we possess these virtues more per- 
fectly. Meekness is so peculiarly the virtue of Jesus 
Christ, that the Prophets rarely allude to any other, 
when giving the description of Him. Amongst all the 
Saints of the Old Testament, those who have been the 
most perfect figures of Jesus Christ, as Moses and 
David, have excelled in this virtue. Erat enim Moyses 
vir mitisdmm super omnes qui morabantur in terra. 
For Moses was a man exceeding meek above all men 
that dwelt upon earth. (Num. xii. 3.) Memento Domine 
David, et omnis mansuetudinis ejus, 0 Lord, remember 
David and all his meekpess. (P. cxxxi.) It is said of 



Digitized by Google 



168 



THIRD PART. 



the first that he was the meekest of all men then 
living on the earth: and the second seems to have 
preferred meekness to all other virtues. Does not 
Jesus Christ Himself plainly teach us, by His example 
and His words, that meekness, properly speaking, 
forms His character, and that it is not possible to be 
like Him, without having his meekness ? Perfect love 
always seeks resemblance. Now this unalterable meek- 
ness is the virtue which more particularly impresses 
upon us the external and visible features of resem- 
blance to our Blessed Lord, and it is also the ordinary 
effect of His love. 

This lovely virtue contains, it is true, many others. 
For it is impossible to be always good humoured, to 
receive all things with a smiling countenance, to prac- 
tise an unalterable meekness on all occasions, if we 
have not also sincere humility, continual mortification, 
perfect charity, an undisturbed tranquillity of soul, 
superior to all annoyances. For, if one of these virtues 
be wanting, meekness also will fail. That reserve, 
that austere and disagreeable exterior, that stern ex- 
pression which is seen sometimes in persons who pass 
for spiritual, is usually the effect of a natural dispo- 
sition, not yet mortified. It was never the charac- 
teristic of a disciple of Jesus Christ. For our Divine 
Saviour desires that meekness, and perfect humility of 
heart, should be the distinguishing qualities of His 
disciples. We daily find by experience, that we are 
never more meek towards others, than when we feel 
most tender love for Jesus Christ. It was by meekness, 
that the Apostles gained the most obdurate nations. 
Apostolical men will never gain anything for the 
Church, if they do not possess this amiable virtue. 

Liberty of spirit makes our interior conformable to 
that of Jesus Christ, by a perfect forgetfulness of 
ourselves, and perfect resignation to what He ordains, 
so that we behold, in all things, only the will of God, 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER V. 



169 



and are always disposed to fulfil it, without uneasiness, 
and without anxiety. It is a sure sign, that we have 
not much love for Jesus Christ, if we are not in this 
disposition, of perfect resignation to His will. If we 
feel so much pleasure in doing what is agreeable 1 to 
those w» profess to love, is it not evident, that we can- 
not truly love Jesus Christ, without being inclined to 
do all that He desires ? When a person loves Him, he 
does only what is pleasing to Him, and nothing gives 
him pleasure, but what He wills. 

When we have once entirely given up our hearts to 
the love of Jesus Christ, this love no longer admits of 
either our own sentiments, or our own will ; it takes 
from us all our affections, and places us in a holy 
indifference, in which all things are the same to us. 
We desire nothing, and yet will every thing : we care 
not in what the will of God employs us, whether in 
great or little things, pleasant or disagreeable. Every 
kind of event is the fulfilment of our desires, because, 
since we will whatever God allows to happen, nothing 
can happen that does not please us. Those who are 
attached to their employments, to the place of their 
abode, to their conveniences, or to any thing else, can- 
not serve our Lord with liberty of spirit, because they 
are slaves of their own will. This causes them to gain 
little merit, and disturbs the peace of their souls. 
They withdraw themselves from the guidance of the 
Holy Spirit and the ways of grace. They find the 
yoke of the Lord bitter and heavy, and expose them- 
selves to many illusions and dangers. Fervent souls 
should therefore, abandon any occupation whatever 
for the love of Jesus Christ, when He requires it. 
Nothing should seem of consequence to them, nothing 
should influence them, but the love of Jesus. All other 
things should be indifferent to them. We must only be 
careful, that this indifference does not degenerate into 
negligence and sloth. 



Digitized by Google 



170 



THIRD PART. 



All our application and all our delight should be to 
do what God wills, when He wills it, and in the man- 
ner He wills it. Without this, there can be no virtue; 
all is illusion and self-love. This perfect conformity to 
the will of God, and perfect submission to the appoint- 
ments of Divine Providence, which lead us«to wish 
for nothing but what God wills that we should do, 
whether He makes use of us, for distinguished employ- 
ments, or leaves us to lead a life of obscurity, are not 
only the shortest and most secure path, but properly 
speaking, the only one, by which to acquire perfect 
purity of heart, a great love of Jesus Christ, and at 
the same time, great merit. A man who places his 
reliance on God, is immoveable, and cannot be shaken. 
Whatever adverse circumstance may happen, he is 
content, because he has no other will than that of God. 
What a happy state of peace and tranquillity ! But we 
must fight courageously, if we would attain it. 

The third effect of this love, is an entire dependence 
on Jesus Christ in all our actions. This consists in a 
constant remembrance of Jesus Christ, by which we 
keep Him in view, and continually represent Him 
to ourselves, as the model of our actions. To this 
model, we strive to conform ourselves. We do only what 
He wills. We try to do it in the manner in which He 
Himself did it, whilst He was amongst us visibly on 
earth. This sight and example of Jesus Christ re- 
gulate the life of those who love Him, and give to 
them that modesty of manner and odour of sanctity, 
which equally attract and edify all, and inspire venera- 
tion for their persons, and love for their virtue. 
. It cannot be conceived what advantage may be drawn 
from this exercise of the love of Jesus Christ, and from 
looking on Him as the perfect model of our actions. 
By this means, our heart becomes insensibly detached 
from creatures; self-love dies away and becomes ex- 
tinct : defects are corrected, the soul is filled with the 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER Y. 



171 



spirit of Jesus Christ, and great progress is made in 
perfection. 

Esteem and love of the cross are also the ordinary 
effects of the perfect love of Jesus Christ. A person 
who loves our living Saviour affectionately, has no 
difficulty in entering into His sentiments. He easily 
conforms himself to His inclinations and His desires ; 
he respects whatever He esteems ; he finds attractions 
in all that He loves : he feels nothing but disgust for 
what displeases Him. It may be said, that this con- 
formity of desires and sentiments is a necessary effect 
of true love. Hence also springs that wonderful love 
of the cross, in all those who ardently love Jesus Christ. 
We find a difficulty in the exercises of piety; our 
Lord's yoke seems heavy, the very name of cross and 
humiliation alarms us ; and yet there are numbers of 
persons of all ages, of various characters and ranks, 
who find so much delight in crosses, that they would 
be inconsolable were they, for a moment, without 
suffering. How are we to account for such difference 
of sentiments ? It is because we have but little love 
for Jesus Christ, whilst they love Him much. To be 
without suffering in this life, seemed to St. Teresa 
more bitter than death. St. Mary Magdalen, of Pazzi, 
only felt death hard, because it deprived her of the 
pleasure she enjoyed in the sufferings of this life; 
Both were ardent lovers of Jesus Christ. 

The view of Jesus Christ, said a great servant of 
God, makes the cross so sweet, that it seems to me 
impossible to be happy without it. I feel disposed to 
remain all my life without any consolation, even spfc 
ritual. The love of Jesus Christ is everything to me. 
The cross has its charms, and whoever loves Jesus 
Christ perfectly, finds ineffable delight in crosses. We 
have not the same sentiments, because we have not the 
same love. 

" Many persons fly from the cross," says the author 



Digitized by Google 



172 



THIRD PART. 



of the Interior Christian, " under the idea of glorifying 
God in a more exalted manner, by important actions 
for the good of their neighbour. But they do not see 
that this is merely an effect of their self-love, not of 
the love of Jesus Christ. We must serve Him in His 
way, and not in our own. His love ought to inspire us 
with sentiments conformable to His. Jesus Christ loved 
the cross to excess. We cannot fail to love the cross, 
if we really love Jesus Christ. This love of Jesus 
Christ daily produces a greater desire of loving Him in 
those who love Him, and the more perfect this love is, 
the more ardent will be this desire. 

The last effect of this love is a high esteem and a 
great veneration for everything connected with Jesus 
Christ. We feel an insatiable hunger after Holy Com- 
munion. The mere representation of Jesus Christ in- 
spires devotion when we love Him. We pronounce 
His divine words with profound respect, and the very 
name of Jesus causes in us an increase of His love. 
In the world, even the lowest servants of persons of 
rank are honoured. Their arms are treated with 
respect. Whatever bears their name or their livery is 
safe from insult. The poor bear a special relationship 
to Jesus Christ. They, in a special manner, wear His 
livery. Jesus Christ acknowledges what is done for 
them as done for Himself. Charity, then, towards the 
poor is the ordinary effect of the true love of Jesus 
Christ. This love inspires us not only with compassion 
for the poor, but also with affection and a certain 
respect, which has sometimes led the greatest monarchs 
to serve them with their own hands. We feel a certain 
pleasure in giving alms to them ; we do not know how 
to refuse a poor person, being convinced that we reject 
Jesus Christ in their persons, and we feel that this 
charity is more or less ardent, in proportion as we have 
a more or less ardent love for Jesus Christ. We may 
ascertain by these signs whether we love Jesus Christ 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTEE V. 



173 



perfectly. The more ardent.our love, the more evident 
will be these signs. Nor can we have less equivocal 
proofs of our love than these effects. 

As we do not undertake to relate here all that the love 
of Jesus Christ operates in pure souls, we will say 
nothing of all these wonders, which are rare, only 
because pure souls are rarely found ; it is enough to 
say, that as soon as a soul is inflamed with this divine 
love, she loses all relish and affection for creatures. 
Her desires can no longer find their object in earthly 
things. They are directed only in search of Jesus 
Christ, the centre of their repose. The soul then 
sends forth deep sighs from time to time; a secret 
languor slowly consumes the body. The impression of 
divine love increases to such a degree, that she can do 
nothing but seek her God continually. She is occupied 
with Him at all times, and in all places, whether she 
be at rest or working, whether she sleep or watch, pray 
or recreate herself. She continually thinks of the 
Object of her love, and has no wish but to love and 
please Him. But, to attain to this, we must continually 
purify ourselves more and more, renounce every other 
love, and eradicate from our minds all ideas, which have 
no reference to Jesus Christ. 

The devotion to the Sacred Heart, according to the 
method we offer in this book, is a sure and certain 
means of attaining this sublime state of perfection, and 
of acquiring that exalted virtue we have described. All 
the practices of this devotion tend to give us an ardent 
and affectionate love of Jesus Christ, and this sublime 
perfection consists in the perfect love of Him. 

Adorable Heart of my Divine Saviour, seat of all 
virtues, treasury of all graces, refuge of all holy souls ; 
Sacred Heart, Who art the object of the complacency 
of the Eternal Father, Heart worthy to reign over all 
hearts, to possess the hearts of men and angels ; 
Adorable Heart of my beloved Jesus, Who lovest us 



Digitized by Google 



174 



THIRD PAHT. 



with bo marvellous a tenderness, and Who art, never- 
theless, so little loved by those whom Thou lovest so 
tenderly : why cannot I, oh my loving Jesus, go to every 
place upon the earth, and make known to all, the in- 
effable sweetness and the extraordinary graces, Thou 
bestowest so abundantly on all those who honour Thee, 
and love Thee with their whole hearts! Accept at 
least the sacrifice I make to Thee of mine, and the 
ardent desire I feel that Thou shouldst be blessed and 
praised by angels and men, eternally loved, eternally 
honoured and glorified. 



CHAPTER VI. 

Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus for the 
day of the Feast. 

Although Almighty God should be the end and motive 
of all our actions, and all the days of our life belong to 
Him, by so many titles He has, however, ordained that 
certain days of the year should be specially consecrated 
to Him. Thus He appointed certain solemn festivals 
in the Old Testament, and for the same reason the 
Church has also her particular festivals, and distin- 
guishes certain days of the year with greater solemnities. 
Though we are always obliged to love Jesus Christ, we 
have great reason to believe, that our dear Lord has 
wished a certain day to be fixed, on which this love 
should display itself in a more particular manner. As 
there was a day specially appointed for honouring His 
precious Body in the Adorable Sacrament, and as other 
days were consecrated in honour of His Sacred Wounds, 
so He has willed that there should be one fixed for 
honouring His Sacred Heart. The feast of the precious 
Body of Jesus Christ is celebrated by exposition of the 
most blessed Sacrament, by solemn processions, and 
other magnificent functions. The feast of His Sacred 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VI. 



175 



Heart should be solemnized, wherever it is established, 
with evident marks of the most sincere and most ardent 
love of Jesus Christ in the Blessed Sacrament. 

Though we have elsewhere mentioned that Jesus 
Christ has Himself chosen the day for this Feast, it 
will not be out of place to repeat it here. 

The person, whom we have named, being one day 
during the Octave of Corpus Christi in the presence of 
the Blessed Sacrament, replenished with more than 
ordinary graces, and touched with a desire of making 
some return, and rendering love for love, the Son of 
God appeared to her and said, that she could not da 
anything more pleasing to Him than what He had so 
often asked of her. " Then," she said, " my beloved 
Saviour, showing me His Divine Heart, said : ' Behold 
this Heart, which has loved men so much, that it has 
spared nothing, even so far as to consume itself, in 
order to show them Its love ; and in return, I receive 
from the greater number only ingratitude, irreverence, 
and sacrileges. But what is more afflicting to Me is, 
that I receive this treatment from hearts which are 
consecrated to Me. Therefore I ask of Thee, that the 
first Friday after the Octave of the Blessed Sacrament 
be dedicated as a special festival in honour of My 
Heart ; that a reparation of honour be made with an 
act of atonement, and that Holy Communion be re- 
ceived on that day, to repair the insults It has received 
when It has been exposed on the Altars, and I promise 
thee that my Heart shall dilate Itself to pour out 
abundantly the influences of Its divine love on those 
who shall render It this honour.' " 

We see from these words what this practice is, what 
profit we should derive from it, and what is its fruit. 
In order to receive without fail the great graces which 
God promises us through the practice of this devotion, 
and especially an ardent love of Him, which is the 
greatest of all His graces, we should do as follows : — 



Digitized by Google 



176 



THIRD PART. 



The Feast (when it is established) begins on the last 
day of the Octave of Corpus Christi. We may spend 
part of this day in reading some chapters of this book, 
especially the first, second, and third of the first part, 
that we may understand well the motive that should 
influence us on this feast, and what should be our dis- 
positions, and with what sentiments we should perform 
all the exercises of this devotion. We should spend 
all the time we can, before the Blessed Sacrament, with 
profound respect. Each of us may recite there the Rosary 
or other prayers, as his devotion suggests. Towards 
evening we should spend an hour, or half an hour, in 
reading attentively and with reflection the first chapter 
of the third part. This lecture or consideration will 
serve as a meditation, and will help us much in pre- 
paring for the feast of the following day. We should 
be particularly careful to spend, as far as we can, the 
rest of the day in silence ; for interior recollection is a 
necessary disposition for this devotion. We should do 
well to spend, if we can, about a quarter of an hour, 
before retiring to rest, in reflecting on the motive of the 
feast we are going to celebrate, and on the sentiments 
awakened within us during the consideration we have 
made. We may reflect how reasonable it is to have an 
ardent love of Jesus Christ, and to repair, as far as we 
are able, the insults which He receives, in the most 
loving of all mysteries, from those who will not love 
Him. We must avow to Jesus Christ our desire to 
pass the remainder of the night, were it possible, at the 
foot of the Altar, beseeching our angel guardian to 
supply our place, and preparing ourselves to testify, on 
the following day, the sincerity of our desire, by our 
diligence in going to the Church. We must endeavour 
to keep alive these good sentiments, and if we awake in 
the night, we must immediately adore Jesus Christ in 
the Adorable Eucharist, and renew the desire we have 
to go and visit Him. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VI. 



177 



We must, if we can, consecrate the whole of the 
following day to honouring the Sacred Heart of Jesus in 
the most Blessed Sacrament, and should keep ourselves 
free from all unnecessary business, and from anything 
that can easily be deferred to another time. We must 
carefully avoid all useless occupations. The least 
moment of such a day is infinitely precious. As soon 
as we have risen, we must prostrate ourselves and 
adore Jesus Christ, accompanying this act of adoration 
with all the sentiments which a heart, deeply touched 
and inflamed with love, is capable of feeling. We 
must offer to Him all that we shall do in honour of His 
Sacred Heart, and with a view to acknowledge His love 
and His benefits. Those who are so happy as to have 
Jesus Christ in their own house, must make more haste 
than ever to be the first to visit Him. Others must 
try to do so as soon as possible. Confession should be 
accompanied, if possible, by a more perfect contrition 
than usual, at the thought of so much ingratitude, and 
of our own acts of irreverence, of which we should do 
well to accuse ourselves, if not in particular, at least in 
general. We must omit nothing in order to make a 
good preparation for holy Communion. As on this day 
Communion is received to repair the defects in all 
previous Communions, it is unnecessary to say with 
what devotion we should communicate. Our profound 
respect in the presence of Jesus Christ must be a proof 
of our ardent desire to repair all past irreverence. The 
ardent love, the tender devotion, and the lively faith 
with which we communicate must be a mark of our 
sincere desire to repair, as far as we can, the coldness, 
the incredulity, and the irreverence with which so 
many have communicated. Moved with sensible grief 
at seeing Jesus Christ so little loved, and even outraged 
in the adorable Eucharist, we must receive Him as an 
angry God, Whom we wish to appease by this action ; 
as an offended Saviour, with Whom we wish to be 

N 

Digitized by Google 



X78 



THIRD PART. 



reconciled ; as a Spouse, disgusted by our indifference, 
Whom we desire to love perfectly for the future. Full 
of tender and affectionate sentiments, we must approach 
the holy table with unusual modesty and profound 
humility. As we should be chiefly influenced in this 
action by an ardent love of Jesus Christ, this love will 
inspire each one with the sentiments, the affections, and 
the acts that he should produce at this precious time. 
Immediately after Communion, comparing the excessive 
love of Jesus Christ with our extreme ingratitude, 
humbly prostrate at His feet, humbled in mind, and 
with a heart pierced with grief at the sight of so many 
insults, we must make, with particular devotion, the 
act of reparation. In this our heart must have more 
share than our lips, or rather our lips must only 
interpret the sentiments of our heart. We then make 
the act of consecration to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, 
and the offering which will be found in the eighth 
chapter of this last part. We must endeavour to spend 
the remainder of the day in great interior recollection, 
passing, if possible, the whole morning, or at least a 
great part of it, before the Blessed Sacrament, and the 
entire day in the practice of good works, and especially 
in a continual exercise of love towards Jesus Christ by 
frequent acts, each one according to his devotion. 
Towards evening we must make the appointed medita- 
tion for this day. If, however, our state, our employ- 
ments or duties should prevent us from making it, it 
would be well at least to read it attentively, and to 
remain some time in silence, giving scope to the senti- 
ments of devotion we have conceived. We may pray 
at each hour of the day, and then make some spiritual 
reading out of this book. Nothing should be neglected 
which may prove to Jesus Christ how much we love Him, 
and how greatly we desire to see Him ardently loved. 
As religious persons have the advantage of possessing 
Jesus Christ in their own houses, they ought on that 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VI. 



179 



day to be assiduous in paying Him their homage, pass- 
ing all the time at their disposal, before the Blessed 
Sacrament. Secular persons should also spend more 
time than usual, and both must endeavour to visit Him 
at least five times on this day, with special devotion. 

The first visit should be made to thank Jesus Christ 
for the infinite love He has shown us in instituting this 
mystery. 

The second, in thanksgiving for all the times we 
have received Him in the adorable Eucharist and for 
all the special blessings that we have received through 
It. 

The third, to make him a kind of reparation for all 
the outrages He has received from infidels and heretics. 

The fourth, to repair, as far as possible, by profound 
respect, and every kind of homage, the irreverences, 
the acts of impiety, and the sacrileges, which Catholics 
themselves have committed against Him. 

The fifth, must be expressly to adore Jesus Christ in 
spirit in all the Churches, of the town or country, 
where He dwells in the most Blessed Sacrament, 
where He is abandoned by almost all, and where He is 
kept with so little reverence, so rarely* visited, and so 
universally forgotten. 

As the love of Jesus Christ is the chief motive of all 
these practices of devotion, many persons, in order to 
please Jesus Christ the more, add many other good 
works, which love suggests to them, and which all tend 
to the same end. Some visit on that day, all, or at 
least some of the Churches in which the Blessed 
Sacrament is kept, and endeavour, by their devotion 
and modesty to repair the profanations and contempt 
which Jesus Christ has suffered. Others induce some 
poor persons to go to confession and communion on 
this day, and after giving them a good meal, dismiss 
them with an alms. Many accompany these practices 
of devotion with some austerities. All in general 

k 2 



Digitized by Google 



180 



THIRD PART, 



should try to do what they can "with lively faith, 
fervour, and particular devotion, and with most ardent 
love of Jesus Christ. 

Chapter VII. 

Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus for 
every month, every week, every day, and for certain 
hours every day. 

It is not necessary to appoint certain days and certain 
hours for particular exercises of devotion when there is 
an ardent love of Jesus Christ. For whoever loves 
much, says St. Augustin, never fails to give proofs of 
it. It is however useful to point out certain periods for 
testifying this love more particularly. This is what we 
propose to do in the present Chapter. 

I. Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus for the 
first Friday in every month. 

The first Friday of every month is particularly ap- 
pointed for honouring the Sacred Heart of Jesus. The 
practices of devotion for it, are very much the same, as 
those which we £ave pointed out for the day of the feast, 
and we should undertake them with the same motive. 
We should prepare for it the day before, by reading the 
first Chapter of the third part of this book, and passing 
some time, on the Thursday evening, before the Blessed 
Sacrament. The following day, immediately on rising, 
we should offer to Jesus Christ, and consecrate in 
honour of His Sacred Heart, all the actions of the day. 
We should endeavour to go as soon as possible to the 
Church, where we shall find it easy, if we really love 
Jesus Christ, to conceive a great sorrow for all the 
insults He has received in the adorable Eucharist. It 
will not be difficult to obtain this true love of Jesus 
Christ, if we reflect ever so little on the motives we have 
for loving Him. We may accuse ourselves in confes- 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VIT. 



181 



sion of all the defects we have been guilty of in the 
presence of our divine Saviour in this adorable mys- 
tery, and of the negligence with which we have received 
and visited Him. We should communicate in the 
same dispositions and for the same intention as on the 
day of the feast, and we should make the act of repa- 
ration, and the act of consecration, with all possible 
devotion, and in the sentiments of one, who ardently 
loves Jesus Christ, and grieves deeply to see Him 
so little loved. We must endeavour to keep alive these 
sentiments during the day. In the evening for an 
hour or half an hour, we can make the meditation we 
have assigned for the first Friday in every month. We 
must remember to make on this day the five visits, the 
motives of which we have explained in the preceding 
Chapter. We may add to the good works we are 
accustomed to perform every day, some alms, or 
penance, to make atonement, on our part, as far as we 
can, for the insults and outrages which Jesus Christ 
has endured, and still endures every day in the Blessed 
Sacrament. We should often think, during the day, on 
the sentiments He must have,, at the sight of our in- 
gratitude, and on the admirable dispositions His Sacred 
Heart still retains in our behalf. Each one will see 
how necessary, for all this, are silence, retirement, and 
interior recollection. We should visit the adorable 
Sacrament more frequently and with more respect and 
devotion than usual, and should continually excite 
ourselves during the day to love Jesus Christ with a 
love of tenderness. This we can do, without neglect- 
ing our occupations, or our necessary employments ; 
entreating our beloved Saviour to open to us His 
Sacred Heart and to grant us the grace to dwell there 
the rest of our days. 

Besides these exercises of piety, charity towards our 
neighbour, which is an ordinary effect of the true love 
of Jesus Christ, obliges all who have a devotion to His 



Digitized by Google 



182 



THIRD PART. 



Sacred Heart, to pray particularly every month for 
all, whom the same love unites, in a more strict and 
special manner, in this Sacred Heart. All Priests who 
practise this devotion, should say Mass every month for 
all who have a devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
Christ, offering this divine Sacrifice for all the neces- 
sities of these chosen souls, begging our Lord to increase 
their number, and to inflame the hearts of all who 
truly love Him, with a more and more ardent love. 
Those who are not Priests should offer up holy Commu- 
nion once a month for the same object. Besides the 
merit of this act of charity, it has also this advantage, 
that all who practise the devotion to the Sacred Heart 
of Jesus may be certain, that a very great number of 
very virtuous persons, and of those who love Jesus 
Christ most ardently, pray particularly for them every 
month. This charity should also include those, who, 
having practised this devotion during life, are suffering 
after death in Purgatory, for whose relief we must offer 
the adorable sacrifice, or our Communion. 

As this devotion has no other object, but to procure 
an ardent and perfect love of Jesus Christ, and to 
repair, as far as possible, all the insults that have been 
offered Him, and are still daily offered Him in the 
adorable Eucharist, it is quite clear that it is not so 
confined to certain days, that it cannot be practised at 
other times also. Jesus Christ is at all times 
deserving of our love. He is always despised and ill- 
treated by men in this adorable mystery. It is most 
juBt, then, that at all times, reparation should be made 
Him, so that whoever is prevented from performing this 
devotion on the first Friday of the month, can do so on 
another day of the month. In every month, the first 
day of Communion may be consecrated to so religious a 
practice, by endeavouring to do on that day what could 
not be done on the first Friday of the month. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER Vir. 



183 



II. Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus for 
every week. 

The Friday in each week is also an appropriate day 
for honouring, specially the Sacred Heart of Jesus. 
Our beloved Saviour gave us on this day too evident 
marks of His love, for us not to make Him some return 
of love. Jesus Christ has shown us plainly, how 
pleasing it is to Him, that the whole of this day should 
be consecrated in honour of His Sacred Heart. We 
should therefore offer and consecrate to Him all that we 
are going to do during the day, wishing to do a great 
deal, but especially to perform well all we have to do, 
in order to honour more particularly His Sacred Heart, 
The desire of repairing the contempt and the insults, 
that Jesus Christ has received in the Adorable Sacra- 
ment, and to give Him marks of our love and gratitudej 
should be the motive of every practice of this devotion. 
Priests should offer up Mass on this day, for this in- 
tention. Those who are not Priests, and can com- 
municate, would do well to do so. They should at least 
assist at Mass with more respect and devotion than 
usual, with the intention of repairing, as far as pos- 
sible, by their love and homage, the insults and outrages 
to which love exposes Jesus Christ in this adorable 
mystery. They should offer up this divine sacrifice for 
this end, and may communicate spiritually. If any 
thing prevents them from assisting at Mass, they must 
endeavour to supply for it by some other exercise of 
devotion. But no one should omit the following points. 
The first is, to excite and keep up during the day, a 
great sorrow at seeing Jesus Christ so forgotten, so 
little loved, and unworthily treated by men in that state 
especially, where this loving Saviour more manifestly 
shows to men, the excess of his liberality and His love. 
The second is, to visit on this day the adorable Sacra- 
ment with more respect and devotion than usual, and 



Digitized by Google 



184 



THIRD PART 



with the intention, of making reparation by our love, for 
the ingratitude of men, towards Jesus Christ in the 
Blessed Sacrament. If, however, our occupations and 
obligations prevent us from making these frequent 
visits, we may at least adore Him in spirit from the 
place where we are, and supply by interior acts for the 
want of these exterior marks of devotion. We may 
enter, from time to time, as it were, into the adorable 
Heart of Jesus, considering what are the sentiments of 
our loving Saviour towards us, and the earnest desire 
He has to fill us with His graces, and inflame us with 
His love. 

These reflections which may be made at any time, and 
in any place, cannot fail to inspire us with affectionate 
sentiments, suited to the intention we propose to our- 
selves in this devotion. It will suffice for this, if we 
are careful to enter into ourselves from time to time, 
if we keep silence a little more, and endeavour to be less 
dissipated, and more recollected. This practice is 
suited to all kinds of persons. It is extremely useful ; 
nor is it easy to express what great favours and graces, 
even sensible ones, it procures for those who are careful 
and faithful in frequently making use of it. The third 
point we should bear in mind on this day, is, to 
perform some good work, or little act of mortification, 
exterior or interior, with the same motive, and for the 
same intention. 

We may read such parts of this book as are best 
suited to excite in us an ardent love of Jesus Christ, 
and we must try to find half, or a quarter of an hour, to 
make the meditation assigned for the first Friday in 
each month. 

HI. Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus for 
every day. 

Besides these exercises of devotion to the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus, for every year, every month, and every 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER TO. 



185 



week ; we must also have certain hours every day, at 
which to think more particularly of Jesus Christ and to 
honour His Sacred Heart, by giving Him more particular 
proofs of our gratitude and our love. The morning, as 
soon as we rise, the time of Mass, certain hours of the 
afternoon, and the period before retiring to rest, are the 
most suitable times for this purpose. In the morning, 
immediately on rising, we may prostrate ourselves, after 
the example of many Saints, in the direction of the 
nearest Church, where we know that the Blessed 
Sacrament reposes, and while in this position, make an 
act of faith, adore Jesus Christ in this august Sacra- 
ment, and love Him with tenderness, for this love 
is as easy as it is reasonable. After thanking Him for 
instituting this mystery of love, and declaring the grief 
we feel at seeing Him so outraged, and the desire we 
have of visiting Him as soon as possible, and of loving 
Him continually, we may recite some prayer, protesting 
that we wish to have no desire or sentiment during the 
whole day, but what is conformable to the desire and 
sentiments of the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ. 

The time of Mass is certainly one of the best for 
honouring and loving the adorable Heart of Jesus Christ. 
We do not give any particular practice for this precious 
time. The love of Jesus Christ, which ought to 
occupy us all at this time, does not fail to inspire each 
one with what is most appropriate. We have only to 
consider with faith, what Mass really is, and to assist 
at it with deep respect and singular modesty, in other 
words, like one who really believes. A little before the 
Priest's Communion, we may make the act of consecra- 
tion. We must communicate spiritually, that is, we 
must have a great love of Jesus Christ, and a great 
desire to receive Him. The rest of the Mass should 
be employed, in thanking Jesus Christ for having loved 
us to such a degree, as to institute this mystery, in 
asking pardon for the ingratitude of men, who value 



Digitized by Google 



186 



THIRD PART. 



this mystery so little, and lastly, in endeavouring 
to supply for their irreverence and insensibility by our 
adorations, and our ardent love. Priests, who have the 
happiness of offering up this divine Sacrifice, will feel 
more devotion every day ; their faith will become daily 
more perfect. Jesus Christ will fill them with greater 
graces, and they will daily love Him more, if they 
remember to offer up daily this divine Sacrifice, with 
the intention of repairing, as far as possible, by 
means of this adorable Victim, the insults which Jesus 
Christ receives in this adorable Mystery ; and if when 
Jesus Christ is present before them, they are careful to 
adore His Sacred Heart. All who visit the Blessed 
Sacrament, or assist at Mass, should do the same, and 
it will be difficult not to feel devotion, and behave with 
respect in the presence of Jesus Christ, when we go 
before Him with no other end, than to make Him this 
reparation of honour, and to atone by this very action, 
for the irreverences and insults which He has received. 

The afternoon is also a very fitting time for honour- 
ing the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ and for proving 
our love to Him. As this is the time when Jesus 
Christ is visited by comparatively few persons, those 
who go to visit Him at this time, are sure to be 
well received. It is not difficult to find a quarter, or 
half a quarter, of an hour in the afternoon, to go and 
adore Jesus Christ in the Blessed Sacrament 

It cannot be custom that induces us to go at that 
time, nor is it the crowd that draws us. It is therefore 
evident that these visits are the effect of pure love, and 
consequently they are abundant sources of grace, for 
Jesus Christ never allows Himself to be surpassed hi 
liberality. The love of Jesus will assuredly occupy us 
during these visits. This love is usually more sen* 
sensibly felt, when we give these sensible marks of a 
true, faithful, and constant love. 
- At night, before retiring to rest, we should adore the 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VII. 



187 



Sacred Heart of Jesus, regarding It as a place of 
refuge and of retirement, in which we wish to take our 
rest. 

We should also thank Jesus Christ for having 
instituted the Blessed Sacrament. Though it is the 
greatest of all benefits, there are few who thank Him 
for it. We should make many acts of contrition and 
love, towards a God so loving, and Who loves us in- 
finitely. It was a practice of St. Aloysius, to recite 
every night immediately before retiring to rest, three 
Hail Mary 's, to place himself specially under the pro- 
tection, and as it were, in the Heart of the Blessed 
Virgin. He would afterwards make a profound re- 
verence in the direction of the Church to adore the 
Blessed Sacrament, entreating the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus who watches continually over all the Church, and 
in particular over those who love Him tenderly, to 
preserve him, by His mercy, from all the artifices 
of the enemy ; declaring, that in that Sacred Heart he 
desired to take his repose, saying with the Author 
of the Imitation of Jesus Christ : In pace, in idipmm, 
hoc est in te uno summo bono, dormiam et requiescam. 

Such, then, is a method of practising the devotion 
to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ. But we must 
remember that, as, with the true love of Jesus Christ, 
respect and veneration for the most Blessed Sacrament 
form the distinguishing characteristics of this devotion 
and of all these practices, so all who perform them, 
should distinguish themselves by their assiduity, their 
profound respect, and their modesty, in presence of the 
Blessed Sacrament. Thus, an ardent love of Jesus 
Christ, and a special devotion towards the Adorable 
Eucharist, should be their peculiar characteristic. 

This love should be the spring of all our desires* the 
end of all our thoughts. In a word, the true love of 
Jesus Christ, should be the principal object and motive 
of all these practices. And most certainly, if we per* 



Digitized by Google 



188 



THIRD PART. 



severe with fidelity in these holy practices, we shall 
soon find this perfect love sensibly increase within 
us. 

This devotion is so dear to Jesus Christ, that it seems 
as if He could refuse nothing to, those who practise it. 
This is what our Divine Saviour promised to the person 
whom He employed, to inspire the faithful with it. It 
is what experience has happily confirmed, and continues 
daily to prove. 

We must also take notice : 1st, never to fail to adore 
in a tender and affectionate manner the Heart of Jesus 
Christ, every time we go before the Blessed Sacrament 
of the altar ; 2nd, to visit It as frequently and as re- 
spectfully as we can, and to inspire all kinds of persons 
with this devotion. For it is the property of the per- 
fect love of Jesus Christ, to inspire the desire, not only 
of loving Him daily more and more, but also of seeing 
Him every day more known, and more respectfully 
adored, more frequently visited, and more ardently 
loved. 

Chapter VIE. 

Exercises of this Devotion. 

Under the name of exercises of this devotion, are 
understood the act of Reparation, the Act of Consecra- 
tion, and the other vocal prayers, which are offered 
to Jesus Christ on certain days of the year, more 
specially dedicated to the honour of His Sacred Heart ; 
as also the Meditations which may be made on these 
days. 

It is well to remark here, that though these exercises 
are assigned to certain days in the year, they are not 
so limited to these days, as not to be also most useful 
at any other time, provided they are performed with 
devotion. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VIII. 



189 



Act of Reparation to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ, to 
be made brfore the Blessed Sacrament on the Friday 
after the Octave of Corpus Christi, and which it may 
be well to renew on the first Friday in each month, after" 
Communion. 

Most adorable and most amiable Jesus I Ever full 
of love for us, ever touched with compassion for our 
miseries, ever actuated by the desire of making us 
partakers of Thy treasures, and of giving Thyself 
wholly to us : Jesus, my Saviour and my God, Who, 
through an excess of the most ardent and most won- 
derful love, hast placed Thyself in the condition of a 
victim, in the Adorable Eucharist, where Thou offerest 
Thyself for us in sacrifice so many times every day, 
what must be Thy sentiments in this state, at finding 
no return for all this, in the hearts of the greater part 
of men, but hardness, forgetfulness, ingratitude and con- 
tempt ! Was it not enough, Oh my God, to have taken 
the most painful means of saving us, when Thou couldst 
have shown us Thy excessive love at much less cost ? 
Was it not enough to abandon Thyself once to that cruel 
agony, and deadly sorrow, caused in Thee by the hor- 
rible sight of our sins, with which Thou wast loaded ? 
Why wilt Thou still expose Thyself daily to all the 
insults of which the unspeakable malice of men and 
devils is capable ? Ah ! my God and my most loving 
Redeemer, what are the sentiments of Thy Sacred 
Heart at the sight of all this ingratitude, and of all 
these sins ? How great was the bitterness with which 
so many sacrileges, and so many outrages, afflicted and 
tormented Thy Heart ? 

Moved by extreme sorrow for all these insults, be- 
hold me prostrate and annihilated before Thee, to make 
Thee an act of reparation in the sight of Heaven 
and earth, for all the irreverences and the outrages 
which Thou hast received on our Altars, since the 



Digitized by Google 



190 



THIRD PART. 



institution of this adorable Sacrament. With a heart 
humbled and broken with grief, I ask of Thee a thou- 
sand and a thousand times pardon for all these indig- 
nities. Why cannot I, oh my God, wash with my 
blood every spot where Thy Sacred Heart has been 
so horribly outraged, and the greatest proof of Thy love 
received with such incredible contempt. Why cannot 
I, by some new kind of homage, humiliation and anni- 
hilation, repair so many sacrileges and profanations? 
Why cannot I, for one moment, be master of the hearts 
of all men, that I might repair, in some manner, by 
the sacrifice of all of them to Thee, the forgetfulness 
and insensibility of all those who refuse to know Thee, 
or who, though knowing Thee, have loved Thee so 
little? 

But oh, my beloved Saviour, what covers me still 
more with confusion, and should fill me with greater 
grief is, that I also have been of the number of these 
ungrateful souls. My God, Who seest the depths of 
my heart, Thou knowest my sorrow for my ingrati- 
tude, and my distress at seeing Thee thus unworthily 
treated. Thou knowest how I am disposed to do 
and suffer all, in order to repair them. Behold me 
then, oh Lord, my heart penetrated with the deepest 
grief, humbled and prostrate, ready to receive from 
Thy hand, whatever it shall please Thee to require of 
me in reparation for so many outrages. I shall bless 
and kiss a hundred times the hand that shall inflict 
upon me so just a punishment. Why am I not a 
victim capable of repairing so many injuries ? Why 
cannot I bathe and wash with my tears and blood 
every spot, where Thy Sacred Body has been thrown 
to the ground, and trampled under foot ? Too happy 
should I be, if I could, by every possible torment, 
repair such outrages, such contempt, and such acts of 
impiety ! If I do not merit this grace, accept at least 
the true desire I have of it. Receive, oh Eternal 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VIII. 



191 



Father, this act of reparation which I make Thee in 
union with that which was made to Thee by this 
Sacred Heart on Calvary, and with that which Mary 
also made at the foot of the cross of her Son. Pardon 
the many negligences and irreverences I have com- 
mitted, and give me grace to carry out the resolution 
I now make, of neglecting nothing, in order that I 
may ardently love and honour, in every way possible, 
my Sovereign, my Saviour, and my Judge, Whom I 
believe to be really present in the Adorable Eucharist. 
I intend to show in future, by my respect in His 
presence, my assiduity in visiting Him, that I believe 
Him to be really present. And as I profess to honour 
in a special manner His Sacred Heart, I desire to 
spend the rest of my life in this same Heart. Grant 
me the grace which I beg of Thee, that I may breathe 
out my last sigh in this Divine Heart, at the hour of 
my death. Amen. 

Act of Consecration to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. 

[It should be borne in mind that by the words con- 
secration and donation, which are sometimes used in 
this act, it is not intended to make a vow, but merely 
a resolution.] 

Adorable Heart of my beloved Jesus, seat of all the 
virtues, inexhaustible fountain of all graces, what 
couldst Thou see in me worthy of Thy affection, that 
Thou shouldst love me to such an excess, whilst, de- 
filed with so many sins, my heart felt nothing for Thee 
but hardness and indifference ? The wonderful proofs 
of the tenderness of Thy love for me, even when I did 
not love Thee, make me hope that Thou wilt accept 
the proofs by which I desire to declare to Thee, that I 
do love Thee. Accept, then, oh my adorable Saviour, 
the desire I feel of consecrating myself entirely to the 
honour and the glory of Thy Sacred Heart. Accept 



Digitized by Google 



192 



THIRD PAET. 



the donation I make to Thee of all that I am. I con- 
secrate to Thee my person, my life, my actions, my 
labours and sufferings, desiring nothing in future, but 
to be a victim consecrated to Thy glory. May I be 
now set on fire, and some day, if it please Thee, be 
wholly consumed by the sacred flames of Thy love. I 
offer Thee, then, oh my Lord and my God, my heart 
with all the sentiments of which it is capable. I desire 
that they may be always perfectly conformed to the 
sentiments of Thy Sacred Heart. Behold me, then, 
oh Lord, entirely in accordance with Thy Heart, behold 
me altogether Thine. Oh my God ! how great are 
Thy mercies towards me ! God of Majesty ! Who am 
I that Thou shouldst deign to accept the sacrifice of 
my heart? This heart shall be in future wholly 
Thine. Creatures shall have no share in it, to Thy 
prejudice. Be Thou in future, my beloved Jesus, my 
Father, my friend, my master, and my all. I wish to 
live only for Thee. Receive then, oh loving Saviour of 
mankind, the sacrifice that the most ungrateful of all 
mankind makes to Thy Sacred Heart, to repair the 
injury which hitherto it has never ceased to inflict 
upon It by corresponding so ill with Its love. It. is 
but little, indeed, that I give to It ; but at least I give 
all I can, and all that I know It desires. I consecrate 
to It my heart. I give it, and will take it back no 
more. 

Teach me, oh my loving Saviour, the perfect forget- 
fulness of myself, since this is the only path that can 
give me entrance into Thy Sacred Heart. As I shall 
do nothing in future but for Thee, grant that all that I 
do may be worthy of Thee. Teach me what I must do 
to attain to the purity of Thy love. Do Thou give me 
this love, a most ardent and generous love. Give me 
that profound humility, without which no one can 
please Thee, and accomplish in me all Thy holy desires 
both in time and eternity. Amen. 



Digitized by Google 



.CHAPTER VJII. 



193 



. Offering to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ. 

Fr. la Colombiere, of whom we have already spoken, 
having found, by his own experience, how useful the 
devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus is, for speedily 
enkindling in the heart a great love of Jesus Christ, 
and for attaining a high perfection in a short time, 
composed this offering, and renewed it several times a 
month with great devotion. This offering, he says, is 
made to honour the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ, the 
seat of all the virtues, the source of all blessings, and 
the refuge of holy souls. 

The principal virtues which we design to honour in 
Him are, first, a most ardent love of God His Father, 
joined to a profound respect, and the greatest humility 
that ever existed. In the second place, an infinite 
patience in sufferings, an excessive grief and contrition 
for the sins which He had taken upon Himself, the 
confidence of a most affectionate son, joined to the con- 
fusion of a great sinner. In the third place, a most 
lively compassion for our miseries, and an immense 
love for us, notwithstanding these miseries ; and not- 
withstanding these affections, each of which He pos- 
sessed in the highest degree possible ; an unalterable 
equanimity, arising from so perfect a oonformity to the 
will of God, that it could not be disturbed by any event, 
however contrary it might appear to His zeal, His 
humility, His love itself, or to any other of His other 
dispositions. This Heart is still, as far as it can be 
so, in the same sentiments. It is, above all, constantly 
burning with an ardent love for men, though in return 
for all this, He meets, in the hearts of these very nien, 
with nothing but hardness, forgetfulness, contempt and 
ingratitude. He loves, and He is not loved. We do 
not even know His love, because we will not condescend 
to receive the gifts by which, He desires to manifest it, 

o 



Digitized by Google 



194 



THIRD PART. 



nor listen to the sweet and tender declarations He 
would make of it to our hearts. 

In reparation for so many outrages, and for such 
cruel ingratitude, O most adorable and most amiable 
Heart of my Jesus, and to avoid, as far as it is in my 
power, falling into a similar misfortune, I offer Thee my 
heart, with all the affections of which it is capable. I 
give myself entirely to Thee. From this hour I protest 
sincerely that I desire to forget myself, and all that in 
any way relates to me, in order to remove any obstacle 
that might prevent my entrance into this Divine Heart, 
which Thou hast the goodness to open to me, and into 
which I desire to enter, to live and die therein together 
with Thy most faithful servants. Filled with Thy love, 
and burning with its flames, I offer to Thy Heart all 
the merit, all the satisfaction of all the Masses, all the 
prayers, of all the acts of mortification, all the religious 
exercises, all the actions of zeal, humility and obe- 
dience, and of all the other virtues that I may practise 
to the last moment of my life. Not only do I offer all 
these, in honour of the Sacred Heart of Jesus, and of Its 
admirable dispositions, but I also earnestly beg Him 
to accept the entire donation I make Him of them, to 
dispose of them in the manner most pleasing to Him, 
and in favour of whomsoever He pleases. And, as I 
have already given over, to the holy souls in Purgatory 
anything there may be in my actions, capable of satisfy- 
ing the divine justice, I desire also that it be distributed 
to them according to the good will of the Heart of Jesus. 

This will not prevent my fulfilling any obligations I 
am under of saying Masses, and of praying for certain 
intentions prescribed by obedience, nor from saying 
through charity Masses for the poor, for my brethren 
and friends, who might request them of me. But, as I 
then make use of a treasure that does not belong to me, 
I intend, as is just, that the obedience, charity, and 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VIII. 



195 



<)ther virtues I may practise on these occasions, may 
all belong to the Heart of Jesus, from which I have 
learned how to practise them. They, therefore, rightly 
belong to Him without reserve. 

Sacred Heart of Jesus, teach me the perfect forget- 
fulness of myself : teach me what I must do to attain 
to the purity of Thy love, of which Thou hast given me 
the desire. I feel within me a great desire of pleasing 
Thee, and a great impatience to carry out this desire in 
practice. But what can I do without a clear light and 
a most powerful help ? And this I can only look for 
from Thee. Accomplish in me Thy will, oh Lord. I 
oppose it, I know well. Yet it seems to me that I wish 
not to oppose it. It must be Thy work to do all, Divine 
Heart of my Jesus. Thou alone wilt have the glory of 
my sanctification if I become a Saint. This appears to 
me clearer than the day. It is for this alone that I 
wish to desire perfection. Amen. 

Act of love to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christy which may be 
_ made in visiting the Blessed Sacrament , after reflecting on 
the immense love which Jesus manifests towards us in this 
mystery j and on the forgetfulnesS and ingratitude which men 
show towards Jesus Christ. 

Permit me to turn to Thee, oh Divine and Adorable 
Heart of Jesus my Saviour, abyss of love and mercy, 
and to ask Thee, full of astonishment at the sight of 
Thy goodness and of my own ingratitude, why, oh my 
God, hast Thou invented a new method of immolating 
Thyself for me in the Divine Eucharist? Dost Thou 
think it little, oh Lord, to have once endured for me the 
scourges, pains, insults, and death of the Cross ? Now 
that Thou art glorious and immortal, must I still see 
Thee continually exposed to insults in Thy Sacrament 
of love, wherein Thou art so often despised, insulted, 
and trodden under foot even by those who ought to love 
Thee most ardently. Can I see myself in the number 

o 2 



Digitized by Google 



196 



THIRD PABT. 



of those Ungrateful wretches without dying of grief and 
shame ? Oh my God, pierce my heart with Thy love, 
and put an end to my ingratitude. Remember that 
Thy adorable Heart, bearing the weight of my sins on. 
Mount Olivet and on the Cross, was afflicted and grieved 
at the sight of my miseries. Do not permit that Thjr 
sadness and Thy sorrows, Thy Blood, Thy tears and 
Thy sweat should be unprofitable to me. Touch my 
heart efficaciously, oh my divine Saviour. Though I 
am ungrateful and unworthy of Thy love, Thou dost 
not cease to love me. Thou didst love me when I loved 
Thee not, when I did not eve^n wish that Thou shouldst 
love me. But now that I wish it, grant me what I ask 
of Thee. I give Thee my heart, place me within Thine. 
Grant that this moment may be that of my conversion, 
that I may begin to love Thee, never again to cease 
doing so ; that I may be wholly dedicated to Thy love 
as Thy slave ; that I may die to myself to have no 
longer any life but for Thee, and in Thee. Amen, 

Act of Adoration to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ, which 
may be made at any time, but principally in the morning at 
the time of prayer, and at night before retiring to rest, 

Jesus Christ, my Lord and my God, Whom I believe 
to be really and truly present in the Blessed Sacrament of 
the Altar, receive this act of most profound adoration, 
to supply for the desire I feel, of adoring Thee con- 
tinually, and in thanksgiving for the sentiments of love 
which Thy Divine Heart therein entertains for me. I 
offer Thee all the acts of adoration, resignation, patience, 
and love which Thy Sacred Heart made during Thy 
mortal life on earth, and still makes, and will make 
eternally in Heaven, in order that I may adore Thee, 
love Thee and praise Thee, as far as is possible to me, 
by means of this Sacred Heart, during the whole time 
of my life. Open to me Thy Sacred Heart : It shall 
be in future the place of my refuge and repose. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VIII. 



Act of Contrition. 

Oh my Saviour and my God, Whose Heart, pierced 
with love and grief, did feel such sorrow for the sins of 
the whole world, why cannot I feel the same grief which 
I have caused Thee by mine ? Supply, I beg of Thee, 
by the contrition Thou didst feel, for what is wanting to 
me. Imprint in my heart a horror and fear of the 
slightest offences. Change and remodel this unhappy 
heart after Thy own, which is infinitely pure, infinitely 
holy, and always inflamed with the love of Thy Heavenly 
Father. I protest that I wish to love nothing in future 
but what He loves, and to detest everything that dis- 
pleases Him. Amen. 

Offering that may be made during the time of Mass. 

As the Mass is the sacrifice of love, in which the 
Heart of Jesus Christ offers Itself for us, and con- 
tinually immolates Itself to His Father, it is principally 
in assisting at this mystery, that we should love and 
adore this Sacred Heart, and especially after the Con- 
secration, considering what thoughts Jesus Christ can 
entertain of us, and those that He has for us — namely, 
the disposition of His Heart, His designs, and His 
desired. Filled with a sincere feeling of gratitude and 
affection, we may make the following act : — 
• Eternal Father, permit me to offer Thee the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus Christ, Thy beloved Son, as He offers 
Himself to Thee in sacrifice. Keceive, if it be pleasing 
to Thee, for me, all the desires, all the sentiments, all 
the affections, all the emotions, all the acts of this 
Sacred Heart. They are all mine, because He offers 
Himself for me : they are mine because I desire to 
have in future none but His : receive them in satisfac- 
tion for all my sins, and in thanksgiving for all Thy 
benefits. Receive them to grant me through their 
merit all the graces which are necessary for me, and 



Digitized by Google 



198 



THIRD PART. 



especially final perseverance. Receive them, lastly, as 
so many acts of love, adoration, and praise which 
I offer to Thy Divine Majesty ; for through Him alone 
Thou art worthily loved, honoured, and glorified. 
Quoniam per ipsum, et cum ipso et in ipso est tibi Deo 
Patri omnipotent in unitate Spiritus Sancti, omnis honor 
et gloria. 

Prayer which St. Gertrude recited every day in honour of the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ 

I salute Thee, oh Sacred Heart of Jesus, living, 
vivifying fountain of eternal life, infinite treasure of 
the Divinity, burning furnace of Divine love. Thou art 
the place of my repose and my refuge. Oh my beloved 
Saviour, inflame my heart with the ardent love which 
inflames Thine ; pour into my heart the great graces, 
of which Thine is the source, and grant that my heart 
may be really united to Thine, that Thy will may be 
mine, and that mine may be eternally conformed to 
Thine ; for I desire that, in future, Thy holy will may* 
be the rule of all my desires, and of all my actions. 
Amen. 

Act of Love. 

I have nothing, oh my loving Saviour and my God ; 
I have nothing that can please Thee, I can do nothing, 
I am nothing ; but I have a heart, and that suffices. 
My health, my honour, and my life may be taken from 
me, but no one can ever take from me my heart. I 
have a heart, and with this heart I can love Thee, oh 
my adorable Jesus, and with this heart I desire to love 
Thee. O my God, I wish to love Thee, and always to 
love Thee, and for no other reason than to love Thee 
always. 

END OF THE THIRD PART. 



Digitized by Google 



199 



MEDITATIONS FOR THE FEAST 

OF THE 

SACRED HEART OF JESUS, 

For each Friday of the month, and for certain days of the 
year, more especially consecrated to the honour of the 
Sacred Heart of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

The two Meditations that follow have been given at 
length, to facilitate their use by all sorts of persons, and 
by those also, who say they do not know how to meditate* 
I ask these last, only to read them with attention, re- 
flecting on what they have read, and I hope that they 
will find that this reading has not been altogether use- 
less, since, when accompanied with the affectionate sen- 
timents towards Jesus Christ, with which grace, will not 
fail to inspire our hearts, it will be a true prayer. Those 
to whom the habit of prayer is familiar, can content 
themselves with looking over the subject of each point. 

Meditation for the First Friday after the 
Octave of the Blessed Sacrament. 

On the incomprehensible love shown us by Jesus Christ in 
the most Blessed Sacrament of the Altar. 

The subject of this Meditation is the incomprehensible 
love shown us by Jesus Christ in the Adorable Sacra- 
ment of the Altar, where He is so little known to men, 
and still less loved, even by those to whom He is known. 



Digitized by Google 



200 



MEDITATIONS. 



The end that we should propose to ourselves in this 
Meditation, and which should be its fruit, is to have a 
most lively feeling of the extreme ingratitude of men, 
the greater part of whom are insensible to the evident 
marks of this ardent love, in order to repair, by a return 
of love, by our adorations, and by every kind of homage, 
all the insults that the adorable Heart of Jesus Christ 
has received, until now, in the most Blessed Sacrament. 

The subject of the three points may be taken from 
three motives, or three desires of Jesus Christ, in the 
institution of this mystery. 

1. The excessive, desire that Jesus Christ has had to 
be always with us. 

' 2. The desire He has to make us partakers of all 
His benefits. 

8. The desire He has to be closely united to us, 
though men are insensible to the proofs of so ardent 
a love. 

1. Prelude. We may represent to ourselves the upper- 
chamber in which the Son of God, seated in the midst 
of His Disciples, instituted this adorable mystery, the 
contempt to which He exposed Himself, even at that 
time, in communicating, the traitor Judas, not being 
able to deter Him for a single moment, from the institu- 
tion of this mystery of love. 

2. Prelude. Convinced, by an act of faith, of the 
truth of this adorable mystery, and disposed, by an act 
of contrition, to receive the lights and graces, which God 
is ready to grant on this occasion, let us ask of the 
Holy Ghost, in the name of Jesus Christ Himself, and 
through the intercession of the Blessed Virgin, and of 
our Angel Guardian > the grace to conceive a great 
sorrow for so much contempt and ingratitude, pene- 
trating deeply into the loving sentiments of the Heart 
of Jesus Christ in the Blessed Sacrament. 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



201: 



First Point. — The ardent desire Jesus Christ feels to be 
with us. 

. Consider that the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ was 
no sooner formed within the womb of the Blessed Virgin, 
than it was inflamed with an immense love for all men ; 
but, as it is the property of love, to desire to be con- 
tinually with those, for whom this love is felt, a life of 
thirty-three years appeared to Him too short, to satisfy 
His excessive desire of being continually with us. It 
was necessary to work the greatest of miracles, to con- 
tent the greatest of all desires. This Heart could not 
place limits to the excess of Its love. Be not afflicted, 
oh my Apostles, said our loving Jesus, if I am obliged 
to leave you to ascend to Heaven ; my Heart desires 
with more ardour to be with you, than you desire to be 
with Me, and as long as there are men upon earth I 
shall be with them : Ecce ego vobiscum sum usque ad 
conmmmatioiiem saculi. All the motives that led the 
Son of God to clothe Himself with our flesh have 
ceased. The work of Redemption is fulfilled. Nothing 
but His excessive desire of being continually with us, 
obliges Him to work this constant miracle, and this 
compendium of all His wonders; His immense love 
making it, as it were, impossible to Him to be sepa- 
rated from us. Jesus has ascended to His Father: 
why does He every day return invisibly on earth, if 
not because He cannot separate Himself from men, 
and His delights are to be with us ? Who would ever 
have thought that Jesus Christ could have loved us to 
this excess ? From the greatest height of glory, He 
desires to come and dwell in our hearts, as if something 
were wanting to His felicity, when He is at a distance 
from us. A desire must be very violent, when it cannot 
be satisfied in Heaven, where all desires are fulfilled. 
Jesus Christ must love men passionately, since not 
restrained, by the great glory He has enjoyed since Hia 



Digitized by Google 



202 



MEDITATIONS. 



Ascension, He every day places Himself, in a humble, 
and obscure state on our Altars, to satisfy the excess of 
His love and of His tenderness ; proving to us the truth 
of what He had said by His Prophet, that His delights 
are to be with us : Delicto mea esse cum Jiliis hominum. 

Reflections. 

1. These are the tender sentiments, with which the 
love that inflames His Sacred Heart, inspires Jesus 
Christ ; but what must be His sentiments, seeing the 
forgetfulness and indifference of those, whom He loves, 
to such an excess, and who love Him so little ? 

2. Jesus Christ has no need of men, and yet He 
loves them to such a degree, that He counts it at 
nothing, to be shut up within a Host, until the end of 
ages, for the sake of the pleasure He has in being with 
us. Men, on the contrary, cannot do without Jesus 
Christ, and yet they love Him so little, that they think 
nothing of this prodigy, so little do they value the 
felicity of conversing with Him. 

3. What were the sentiments of Jesus Christ, when 
He saw Himself abandoned by a whole people, whom 
He had loaded with benefits, and even by His most 
zealous disciples ? What must be the sentiments of 
this blessed Saviour in the Adorable Sacrament of the 
Altar, where, for the greater part of the day, He is fbr~ 
saken by all, and where perhaps so many religion* 
persons, who possess Him in their own house, visit 
Him so rarely ? 

4. Jesus Christ dwells corporally amongst us, and 
there is no concourse in the places where He resides t 
All the places of amusement, all the public squares are 
full of people. There is always a crowd in the palaces 
of the great ; time is always found for visiting them, 
though they are scarcely ever in so amiable a mood as 
to be pleased with the services rendered them ; Ego 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



903 



autem reUcim sum solus; while Jesus Christ is left 
alone in the Churches, though He never refuses any 
one, and receives with exceeding mildness and joy all 
who approach Him. Foetus sum, He says, complain- 
ing by the mouth of His prophet, sicut passer solitarius 
in tecto. I am left alone in My Churches, and no one 
can find half a quarter of an hour, to honour Me in the 
Blessed Sacrament of the Altar. 

5. Visits among men are so ordinary and so frequent ; 
it is only this loving Jesus Who is not visited. 

6. If sweetness in conversation, or interest attracts 
ifs, what conversation is there sweeter or more useful 
than that which we have with the most amiable and 
most powerful person in the world, and Who loves us 
more than any other? Non enim habet amaritucUnem 
conversatio iUius, nee tedium convictus iUius, sed latitiam 
et gaudium (Sap. v. 18). His conversation has neither 
sadness nor weariness ; those chosen souls give testi* 
mony of it, who are always immersed in sweetness in 
His presence, and who would willingly pass whole days 
and nights at the foot of His Altars. 

7. Beloved Jesus, what must be the sentiments of 
Thy Heart, seeing the insensibility and the ingratitude 
of man ? Thou ofFerest Thyself for them many times 
every day in sacrifice on our Altars, and one half hour 
spent in this solemn offering seems to them too long ; 
they are compelled to relieve their weariness and the 
annoyance they feel by continual distraotions of mind. 

8. Ungrateful men ! You do not know Him Who 
continually dwells in the midst of you : Medius ves- 
trum stetit, quern vos nescitis (John i. 26). If we do 
not know Jesus Christ, we are lost without remedy, for 
eternal life consists in knowing Him. But what hope 
can there be, if when we know Him, we do not love 
Him? 

9. Can we say that we love Him ? Should we be 
satisfied, if He loved us no more than we love Him ? 



Digitized by Google 



304 



MEDITATIONS. 



Should we not desire to be better loved by men than we 
ourselves love Jesus Christ? Would it be sufficient 
if our friends showed us no more affection than we 
evince towards this loving Saviour ? Should we desire 
that persons, whom we think we have obliged, should 
feel for us the same gratitude we show Him ? And 
should we allow our children and our servants, to be as 
little respectful in our presence, as we are, in the pre- 
sence of Jesus Christ in His Churches, at the foot of 
His Altars ? My God, the Angels surround these 
Altars in crowds, to adore and love this Adorable 
Jesus, though He is not in the Blessed Sacrament for 
them. Men, for whom alone He has wrought this 
miracle, do not condescend to visit Him. ObUvioni 
datus sum tamquam mortuns a corde (Ps. xxx. 23). 

Lord ! Who, to satisfy Thy excessive desire of being 
with me, hast invented this miracle, what sentiments 
hast Thou of the forgetfulness I have hitherto shown 
towards Thee ? Is this my correspondence with Thy 
love? There is no man whom, if he had the least 
goodwill towards Me, I should not have visited more 
willingly and more frequently. There is no creature 
that I should not have loved more. I have forgotten 
Thee, oh Lord, and hitherto I have not loved Thee ; 
what can I expect, ungrateful and unfaithful as I am ? 
That Thou shouldst think of me? And when hast 
Thou ever ceased to do it? Have I not reason to 
expect that my wanderings, my insensibility, my for- 
getfulness, and my ingratitude, might oblige Thee to 
think of me no more. Ah, my beloved Saviour, re- 
member this. I have given Thee so many reasons for 
forgetting me, for despising me, and for only remember- 
ing me, in order to cast me into hell. Thou hast not 
done it. God of goodness, I thank Thee, and in future 
I desire to serve Thee better. I humbly ask pardon of 
Thee for my ingratitude towards Thee. I hope that, by 
Thy grace, I shall repair in future, by my assiduity m. 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



205 



visiting Thee, in this adorable mystery, the loss I have 
sustained by my indifference ; and that if Thy Temple 
is not my usual habitation, I shall at least have a secure 
refuge in Thy Adorable Heart, which I choose at this 
moment for my habitation, and which I desire no more 
to quit : Hie habitabo, quontam elegi earn (Ps. exxxi. 14). 

Second Point. — The excessive desire of Jesus Christ to 
make us partakers of His blessings. 

Consider, that as Jesus Christ is the source of all 
goods, He wished to dwell among us, only to be ready 
at all times, to make us partakers of His treasures. 
And this loving Saviour has not only desired to make 
us, in this adorable Sacrament, partaker^ of all the 
blessings of which He is the source, but He has willed, 
in giving Himself, to give us the very fountain of all 
blessings. Ostendam tibi omne bonum, quid enim bonum 
*qus nisi frummtum electorum? (St. Bern.) I will 
bestow on you all sorts of benefits, but where else can 
you find all sorts of blessings upon earth, except in 
the most blessed Sacrament ? The princes of the earth 
display their liberality, only at certain times, and to 
certain persons. Jesus Christ, in the Blessed Sacra- 
ment, gives all, at all times, and to all persons. Venite 
ad me omnes qui laboratis et onerati estis. It might be 
said, that we must be poor and afflicted, to have a right 
to draw near to this fountain of every good, and of 
all graces : that it suffices to be unhappy to be well 
received. Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis. This G&& 
of goodness, foreseeing our weakness and our infirmities, 
gives Himself to us, for food to repair our strength, and 
to be a sovereign remedy against all our evils. Et 
ego reficiam vos. Why do you weep, says this loving 
Saviour continually to us, and why are you grieved 
at the loss of your health, of your children, or of your 
property ? Our fles ? quare non comedis, et quamobrem 
afficitur cor tuum ? Numquid non ego melior tibi sum, 



Digitized by Google 



806 



MEDITATIONS. 



quam decern filii? (1 Reg. v. 8.) Do you not find 
in Me all these goods, and even more? It did not 
satisfy the love our divine Saviour bears us, only 
to open to us His Divine Heart, and to pour on us His 
blessings and graces. He desires to be also our 
strength and our shield, against all the efforts of our 
mortal enemies. Parasti in conspectu meo, mensam, 
adversus eos qui tribulant me. (Ps. xii. 25.) Lastly, 
what more could Jesus Christ give us ? What present 
could He make us, that He has not made, in giving 
Himself to us ? Quomodo non etiam cum iUo, omnia 
mobis donavit. (Rom. viii. 32). 

Reflections. 

1. This divine Saviour comes to us full of goodness, 
of love, and of the most ardent love, and we go to 
Him daily, with coldness and indifference. He comes 
to us, loaded with graces and treasures to enrich us, 
and how long shall we go to Him, with our hands 
empty of good works, and with our hearts so filled with 
the love of creatures, that they cannot have any share in 
the great liberality of this divine Saviour ? 

2. There is no blessing which Jesus Christ has not 
given us, in giving Himself in the blessed Eucharist ; 
and there is no irreverence, no outrage, that has not 
been offered to Jesus Christ in this august Sacrament. 

3. Sacratissimum Corpus meum in cibum, et pretiosum 
Sanguinem in potum tibi reliqui, et foetus sum oppro- 
brium hominum, et abjectio plebis. (Bios. Marg. ch. xix., 
num. 4). He is despised only because He has done 
us too much good, because He has loved us too much. 

4. The house and the person, of the vilest and most 
wicked of men, would have been treated with more 
respect, than His Temples and His Sacred Body have 
received. 

6. Love has obliged Jesus Christ to conceal Himself, 
to come down upon our Altars, but to what does He 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



207 



expose Himself, by coming thus disguised ? How much 
contempt, how many insults is He obliged to endure 
daily, from bad Christians, and from infidels. How 
many licentious men, how many heretics treat Him on 
our Altars, as if He were a mock divinity, renewing all 
the outrages that He suffered in His Passion, on account 
of the royalty to which He laid claim. 

6. The Jews exercised less cruelty towards His 
Person, than is exercised daily, towards His sacred 
Body. The consecrated Hosts have been trodden 
under foot, they have been pierced with a thousand 
blows, they have been broken in pieces and burnt; 
without speaking of the execrable uses, to which they 
have been put, and which we cannot think of without 
horror. 

7. The choice which Jesus Christ had made of the 
insults and outrages He received in Jerusalem, took 
away their bitterness ; but who would dare to think 
that this Heart, which has ouly placed Itself in this 
condition to be more loved and honoured by men, could 
regard with indulgence the extraordinary contempt 
that is shown Him ? 

" 8. We feel compassion for a man that is despised 
and ill-treated. Jesus Christ is the only one to whose 
outrages we are insensible ; it even seems as if every 
one took pleasure in ill-treating Him. 

9. We make a child keep silence, if it cries or makes 
a noise, in the house of a person of quality, whom we 
are visiting, and we accustom it, by a sinful indulgence, 
to be ill-behaved in the Church, as soon as it can walk. 
We stand in Church, we laugh, we talk without re- 
straint, even during the holy Sacrifice. We are more 
modest in a place of amusement : we are more 
attentive at a play, than at the celebration of these 
adorable mysteries. Young men carry their insolence 
to the foot of the Altar, and even glory in it : while 



Digitized by Google 



208 



MEDITATIONS. 



the Turks do not dare to raise their eyes in their 
mosques, in which to laugh or talk would be a crime 
punishable with death. 

10. How many houses in these times, are most 
richly furnished ! How many persons would be 
ashamed to wear the shabby ornaments, on which 
the Body of Jesus Christ reposes ! 

11. What answer could we make to heretics, if in 
reproving us for our immodesty in Church, they boasted 
of being more religious than we ? If you believe that 
Jesus Christ is on that Altar in that Host, you who 
understand so well the rules of propriety and of civility, 
you who are so guarded, I do not say in the palaces and 
antechambers of the great, but in the houses of your 
friends, if you believe, how comes it that you lose so 
completely all respect for your God ? We have nothing 
but contempt for your sacraments, might a heretic say 
to us, but do you not yourselves teach us to despise 
them? 

12. It cannot be denied that the Gentiles treated 
with respect, even the most profane ceremonies. 
Christians have the most holy of all mysteries and 
they do not cease to profane them ! Which merit the 
severer judgment ? those who have been religious 
even to superstition, or those who have been impious 
even to sacrilege ? And have we not reason to fear, 
that these infidels will one day be our accusers ? 

13. All agree that this is the most enormous of all 
acts of ingratitude: we feel horror when we think of 
it, and yet we are witnesses of all this impiety ; some- 
times perhaps we have authority over those who are 
guilty of it, and we allow it, and are insensible to 
this forgetfulness, this indifference, these outrages, 
these profanations, these sacrileges ? 

14. Jesus Christ, always full of compassion for our 
miseries, is continually despised, outraged, and pro* 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



909 



faned by all sorts of persons, and who troubles himself 
about it, or has any feeling of it ? 

Oh hardness ! oh insensibility of the hearts of men ! 
Oh most adorable and most amiable Heart of my 
beloved Jesus ! Heart worthy of the respect and adora- 
tions of men and angels : Heart truly worthy to 
possess all hearts, to reign over all hearts ; what must 
be Thy sentiments at the sight of so many outrages ? 
But, what ought to be the sentiments of my heart, 
seeing Thee so ill-treated ? Thou seest Lord, what 
feeling I have of all these indignities. Humbly pros- 
trate here before Thee, I make a reparation to Thine 
honour, and I humbly ask pardon for them. Why 
cannot I in some measure, repair so many outrages that 
have been committed, or at least, prevent others from 
being offered Thee. But, my beloved Saviour, all my 
desires are useless, if I were to shed all my blood I 
could not hinder either one or the other, but at least I 
have a heart capable of loving Thee, capable of offering 
Thee homage : and this, my Saviour, is what consoles 
me. I have a heart, and this heart shall love Thee, 
and shall love nothing in future but Thee. I offer 
Thee, with this heart, all the desires and emotions 
of which it is capable. I offer Thee, oh my Saviour, 
all that I can do, aided by Thy grace; all that can 
please Thee, all that can honour Thee. I invite and 
numbly beseech all the angels, all the Blessed, and 
also Thy own Blessed Mother to supply for my weak- 
ness and my desires. I beg them to honour Thee, 
praise Thee, adore Thee, and love Thee for me, and for 
all men. Permit me, in order to honour Thee worthily, 
to offer Thee Thyself: for I may say that Thou art 
mine, and that in future all Thy desires shall be mine. 
I will praise Thee, oh beloved Jesus, and I will publish 
everywhere, that thou alone oughtest to be loved, 
served, praised, and honoured eternally. 

p 



Digitized by Google 



210 



MEDITATIONS. 



Third Point. — The excessive desire of Jesus Christ to be 
united with us. 

Consider that the union of hearts is the uttermost 
effect of love : and yet this has been the intention of Jesus 
Christ, in instituting this august Sacrament, in which 
all His actions are those of a passionate lover of men ; 
for in this Sacrament love makes Him, as it were, go 
out of Himself, to live no more but in the beloved 
object. Mysterium unitatis nostra in hoc mensa don- 
secravit, says St. Augustin. This Sacrament is a 
mystery of union. It is true that by the Incarnation, 
Almighty Grod has united Himself perfectly to our 
nature : but this hypostatic union was not the end of 
His Incarnation, as the sacramental union was the end 
of the institution of the Blessed Sacrament. He 
united Himself to our nature, to have a body capable of 
the sufferings He desired to endure for us : but He 
gives Himself to us in the Eucharist, only to unite 
Himself intimately to us. He invites us to this ban- 
quet by His promises. Venite ad me o?nne$, et ego 
rejiciam vos. He induces us to go by His threats. 
Nisi manducaveritis carnem Filii hominis, non habe- 
bitis vitam in vobis. He commands that we should be 
made to enter as it were by force : CompeUe intrare. 
Lastly, He does every thing to inflame us with a great 
desire of going to Him, that there may be nothing to 
oppose that which possesses Him of coming to us, 
and being closely united with us. Was there ever 
a stronger proof of a most ardent love? How is 
it Lord? Hast Thou forgotten the bad treatment 
Thou didst receive among us? or hast Thou not 
foreseen that, to which the excess of Thy love for us 
exposes Thee? The heart of a chaste and fervent 
person, is an agreeable dwelling for Thee, but how 
many such wilt . Thou find? Canst thou endure the 
coldness of the number of slothful Christians that 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



211 



receive Thee ? their contempt, their want of faith, and 
ahove all, the frightful corruption of their hearts ? 
These are great obstacles, especially for a Heart that 
cannot endure anything denied : but the strength of 
His love overcomes everything. Conceive, if possible, 
the hatred God bears to sin : it is infinite : and yet, in 
a certain manner, it is less than the desire He has 
of coming to us, for He prefers to give Himself up, so 
to speak, to the sacrilegious embraces of the most 
infamous sinners, rather than renounce the delight He 
feels, in being closely united with those who love Him. 
See to what an excess our Saviour loves us in this 
adorable mystery. That a God should deign to be 
Himself our reward. Ego ero merces tua. (Gen. xv. 1.) 
What a wonder ! But that Jesus Christ should be 
Himself our food : Caro mea vere est cibus, et Sanguis 
mens vere est potus. (Joan vi. 57.) This is a miracle of 
love that surpasses our comprehension : it is a liberality 
in which, so to speak, Jesus Christ has exhausted Him- 
self. These are the effects of the tenderness and of the 
immense love of our Blessed Saviour. 

Reflections. 

1. We believe this miracle : and we are insensible to 
this excess of love. 

2. It is surprising that our Lord can love men 
to this extent : but it is most extraordinary that men 
should not love this Divine Saviour, and that no 
motive, no benefit, no excess of love, can inspire us 
with the least feeling of gratitude ! 

3. Ungrateful man ! Insensible man ! What do you 
see in Him, that keeps you at a distance ? Has He 
not done enough to merit our love ? Alas ! He has 
done more than we should have dared to wish for, 
more than we can believe, more in a certain way than 
was becoming His Infinite Majesty, and shall we still 
remain in doubt, whether we will correspond with so 

p2 



Digitized by Google 



212 



MEDITATIONS. 



great generosity, or whether we shall continue to 
despise it ? 

4. A mark of affection, a service rendered, gains the 
hearts of men : Jesus Christ alone, who, after exhaust- 
ing Himself in this mystery of love, after giving Himself 
to men, does not gain their hearts. 

5. All agree that Jesus Christ loves us infinitely, 
that He is infinitely worthy of love, that He has, besides, 
done all that can be imagined to make Himself loved 
by men. Yet very few love Jesus Christ in reality. 

6. Whence is it that He desires so eagerly to come 
to us, and that we must be constrained to go to Him ? 
Because He loves us passionately, and we do not love 
Him at all. 

7. Whence is it, that we depart from Communion 
quite frozen, though we have been nourished with the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ, which is all fire, all love ? 
Because we approach with a heart full of creatures, 
with a closed heart, impenetrable to the darts of His 
love. Because His Heart indeed enters into ours, but 
ours does not enter into His, because we have a sort of 
dislike to enter therein. 

8. We prefer to give up Communion rather than our 
vices. We should be obliged to be more circumspect, 
to love Jesus Christ more, to lead a more regular life, 
if we received oftener this Bread of Angels. The love 
of Jesus Christ is inconvenient to us: we prefer to 
abstain longer from this Bread of Life, and even to 
condemn frequent Communion, because our heart feels 
an excessive disgust for the Body and even for the 
Heart of Jesus Christ. 

9. I desire with ardour, with eagerness, might 
Jesus Christ now say to us, to unite Myself closely to 
you, Desiderio desideravi; et qxwmodo coarctor ! And 
how is it, that nothing is neglected to render these 
desires inefficacious which so well merit universal gra- 
titude ? et quomodo coarctor ! 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



213 



10. Jesus Christ desires to come to us frequently* 
well knowing that this is the only means, of rendering 
us daily less unworthy of it : and there are Christians, 
who under the pretext that they are not worthy, render 
themselves daily more unworthy, by withdrawing from 
Jesus Christ. 

11. If this were a true sentiment of humility, they 
would most certainly possess the virtue that render us 
most worthy : but it is only disgust for the Body of 
Jesus Christ that keeps them at a distance, and even 
makes them blame those who approach more frequently. 

12. The apparent humility of St. Peter, which led % 
him to refuse to allow Jesus Christ to wash his feet, 
was so strongly condemned, that he would have been 
irremediably lost, if he had not changed his conduct : 
Nisi lavero tibi pedes, non habebis partem mecum in 
aternum. (Joan xiii.) How many, through a pretended 
respect, through false modesty, keep away from life, 
and are lost without remedy, by abstaining from holy 
Communion. 

13. The Gentiles and the barbarous nations of the 
East cried out, on only hearing of this mystery : What 
a good God is the God of the Christians ! What a 
benefactor! He is most worthy of love! but, what 
would they have thought, had they been told that 
this loving God was scarcely loved at all by Christians, 
that this exquisite food had no attraction for them, and 
that on the contrary, they had a disgust for it, and 
that they made use of the humble and obscure state to 
which the excess of His love has reduced Him, to 
commit the greatest sacrileges and the most execrable 
profanations. 

14. What must be the sentiments of the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus, the source of all purity, when He is, 
as it were, buried in a heart full of filth, in a heart 
which breathes nothing but hatred, revenge, and im- 
precations against the Saviour Whom it receives ? But 



Digitized by Google 



214 



MEDITATIONS. 



what ought to be ours, knowing with what malice this 
innocent Lamb is treated, Who opens not His mouth 
amidst so many insults and outrages, Who allows Him- 
self to be led to the Altar, Who allows Himself to be 
sacrificed for our salvation ? 

15. Will such excessive goodness, so great meekness, 
never, have power to touch us ? It softened the heart 
of His judge ; it changed into respect and love the 
insolence and rage of His executioners ; it has softened 
the hardness of the hearts, of the most barbarous 
people : shall there be no hearts but ours, that it cannot 
move? . 

16. Every one shudders with horror at the mere 
recital of the treason of Judas, or of the rage of the 
Jews ; we are daily witnesses, and perhaps accomplices* 
in the sacrileges and outrages, that are offered to our 
loving Jesus, in this adorable mystery, and we are not 
touched by them. 

17. In conspectu tuo sunt omnes qui tribidant me: 
Thou hast before Thine eyes those who so ill-treat Ma 
in this sacrament of love, says He to us by the mouth 
of His Prophet ; thou art a witness of their irreverence : 
Improperium expectavit cor meum: My Heart exposed 
to so many indignities, bears them with patience ; et 
sustinui qui simul contristaretw, I thought there would 
be some one at least to take part in My griefs ; et non 
fuit, I have waited until now, and no one presents 
himself; qui consolaretur : I expected that some one 
Would try to repair by his love, his adorations, and 
his homage, the indignities with which My Heart is 
afflicted, and the contempt that is shown for My love, 
et non inveni, and I have not found any one. 

No, no, Lord : it shall never be true that Thou art 
thus abandoned ; I will put an end to these just com- 
plaints. Oh my loving Saviour, is this the way in 
which we correspond with Thy love ? Why hast Thou 
loved us so much ? But rather, why do we love Thee 



Digitized by Google 



.MEDITATIONS. 



215 



so little ? why do we not love Thee at all ? I have not 
been satisfied with insensibility to the love and tender 
sentiments of Thy Heart ; with insensibility to the out- 
rages that have been committed against Thee. I have 
been myself of the number of those who have thus in- 
sulted Thee. My loving Saviour, Whose Heart is 
always burning with love for me, always open to re- 
ceive me, always ready to show me mercy, pardon me 
my former forgetfulness of Thee, pardon me my tepidity, 
my want of faith, ray irreverence, and receive the 
act of reparation that I here make Thee, prostrate 
before Thee. Thou thinkest of me continually in this 
august Sacrament, Thou lovest me continually, Thou 
hast only sentiments of tenderness for me ; and shall I 
forget Thee, 0 Lord ? and shall I feel only indifference 
for Thee ? and shall I not love Thee, 0 my God ? Take 
me out of life, if I am to continue to love Thee so little. 
Let my heart be annihilated, if it is to be in future in- 
sensible to the greatest of all benefits : that is, towards 
Thee, 0 my God, Who, in giving Thyself to us, hast 
given us the most precious present, and the most signal 
favour Thou couldst bestow. 

Audi Israel quid nunc requirit Dominus, aut quid 
petit a te : hear, oh Christian, what the Lord asks of 
thee ; nisi ut diligas eum in toto corde tuo : He asks 
thee to love Him ; He only asks thy heart. What I 
can it be that I oblige Thee to beg for my heart, after 
Thou hast given me Thine? that I should make Thee ask 
for this heart, and even refuse it, though I daily give it 
lavishly to creatures ? Ah my loving Jesus, if I offer 
it now, wilt Thou deign to accept it ? Cor contritum et 
humiliatum, Deus non despicies. This heart is con- 
trite, it is humble ; it cannot fail to please Thee, 0 
Lord. Receive then this heart, which I offer with all 
the movements of which it is capable, to honour Thee 
and love Thee, all the rest of my life. The greater 
number of the years of my life are past and gone, and 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



are lost, because I did not love Thee, but the happiest 
are left, because I will love Thee in future : DUigam 
Te sacratissimum Cor Salvatoris mei Jesu, pro me vul~ 
neratum : I will love Thee, oh adorable Heart of my 
beloved Jesus ; I will love Thee, oh Sacred Heart, 
wounded in the Eucharist by the love of me. Diligam 
Te. I will honour Thee during the rest of my life ; 
Thou shalt be my repose, my constant abode, and my 
place of refuge : Hcec requies mea> hie habitabo. Let 
no one seek me elsewhere ; I will in future be found no 
more but in the Heart of my loving Jesus : Hie fidenter 
habito, hie me jucunde refieior, hie quiesco maviter, Jnc 
pascor delectabUiter. This Sacred Heart is the place 
of my abode ; this Heart shall be my food. In It I 
will rest from all my labours, burning with the same 
fire of love with which It burns, with It and in it I 
will love Him. 

The Meditation may be concluded with the following 
Prayer : — 

Anima Christi sanctifica me. 
Cor Christi accende me. 
Sanguis Christi inebria me. 
Corpus Christi salva me. 
Aqua lateris Christi lava me. 
Passio Christi comforta me. 
0 bone Jesu exaudi me. 
Intra tua vulnera absconde me. 
Ne permittas me separari a te. 
Ab hoste maligno defende me ; 
In hora mortis mece voca me, 
Et jube me venire ad te : 
Ut cum Sanctis tuis laudem te 
In saecula sfeculorum. Amen. 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



21* 



Meditation fob the Fibst Fbidat in each 
Month. 

On the sentiments of the Heart of Jesus Christ at the sight 
of the ingratitude of men, and of the outrages, to which 
His excessive love for these very men, has exposed Him. 

We may represent to ourselves the pitiable state to 
which tide Son of God was reduced in the garden of 
Olives, when He allowed His imagination to bring 
before Him, with the greatest liveliness possible, and 
with all the circumstances that added to His affliction, 
the greatness of His torments and the indignity of the 
insults He would have to endure, unto the end of ages, 
from three kinds of persons : from the Jews who would 
not acknowledge Him ; from heretics who, though they 
would acknowledge Him, would not believe in His 
benefits ; and from the faithful themselves, who, be- 
lieving in Him, would repay Him only with ingratitude- 
At this sight He began to fear, as the Gospel tells us, 
to be sad and sorrowful, and at last He fell into a sort 
of agony, receiving no consolation from any one, not 
even from His faithful disciples, to whom He com- 
plained of it, when He said to them : " My soul is 
sorrowful unto death, and you forsake me, when you 
see me reduced to so miserable a state." Let us 
imagine that Jesus Christ is making this complaint 
to us. 

Fibst Point.— The sentiments of the Heart of Jesus Christ at 
the sight of the torments He would have to endure, from the 
cruelty of the Jews. 

Consider what were the sentiments of Jesus Christ, 
when He represented to Himself distinctly on one hand, 
the singular favours He had bestowed on this people, 
and on the other, the cruelties and the outrages, that He 
would have to endure from this very nation, after so 



Digitized by Google 



218 



MEDITATION 



many benefits. All the graces that had preceded His 
coming, had been granted only in consideration of the 
merits of Jesus Christ. For that nation chiefly, the 
Son of God had become man. From it, in preference 
to any other, He had selected His relations and His 
friends, He had therein worked His miracles, and 
preached His doctrine, and for so many benefits He 
receives no return but harshness, persecution, and 
insults. Shelter is refused Him when He is about to 
be born into the world : almost as soon as He is born, 
He is obliged to seek refuge among strangers. How 
unworthily was He treated during His whole life ? but 
what did He not suffer at His death ? He was taken 
like a thief, dragged like a culprit along those very 
streets through which, a few days before, He had been 
led in triumph as the Messiah. He was struck on the 
face, as an insolent man, in the house of Caiphas ; He 
was spit upon as a blasphemer ; He was treated with 
contempt and as a mock king; He was made for a 
whole night the butt of insolent soldiers, who load 
Him with insults ; He was treated by Herod as an 
idiot and a fool; He was condemned to be scourged 
like a miserable slave — a criminal was preferred before 
Him, as if He were the more wicked ; lastly, He was 
condemned to the most ignominious of deaths, and 
nailed to a cross, on which He expires in the sight of a 
great number of persons, the greater part of whom had 
been witnesses of His miracles, and in whose favour 
He had worked them, without one person being found 
in all this number of people to take His part, or even 
to compassionate Him. They pass even from insensi- 
bility to contempt, and from contempt to horror and 
execration. But they are perhaps deceived; No, they 
are not deceived. They knqw very well how blameless 
His life has been, how holy and exemplary, miraculous, 
and filled with benefits and prodigies ; and for this they 
persecute Him. 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



319 



All this presented itself clearly and distinctly to 
Jesus Christ. He knew well the dignity of His person* 
the greatness of His benefits, the disinterestedness of 
His love, the baseness, the rage, and the malice of 
those who treated Him so cruelly. 

A noble soul, when it is powerfully possessed by love* 
and hopes by suffering to make known its passion, is 
capable of offering itself spontaneously to torments ; 
but the more generosity and tenderness it has, the 
more pain it feels in bearing injustice and ingratitude : 
especially when it sees itself sacrificed to the envy of 
its enemies, and betrayed by those, from whom it had 
reason to expect help in its misfortunes, and when it 
sees that all that it suffers, is not capable of inspiring 
them with the smallest sentiment of compassion. 

No one ever represented to himself events, with all 
their circumstances, more strongly or more distinctly 
than Jesus Christ. No one had ever a more generous 
heart, and consequently one more sensible to ingrati- 
tude. Oh God ! with what a torrent of bitterness was 
this Sacred Heart then inundated, in representing to 
Himself what He had done for this people, and what 
this people would do against Him. Let us judge, who 
feel so deeply the least contempt, especially when it 
comes from those who are under some obligation to us* 
what must have been the feelings of Jesus Christ at 
such a spectacle. 

. The grief by which His Heart was oppressed, must 
have been very cruel, since it was the only torment of 
His Passion, of which Jesus Christ made any complaint* 
My soul is sorrowful unto death, He said to His 
disciples, and you forsake Me, when you see Me ret 
duced to so pitiable a state : Attendite est videte, si est 
dehr, sicui dolor mens ! Consider and see if there is 
a sorrow equal to mine. Oh ingratitude ! oh cruelty ! 
and in so terrible an oppression, in such mortal sad? 
ness, no consolation, Generatio prava, atque perversa^ 



Digitized by Google 



320 



MEDITATIONS. 



haccine reddis Domino popule stulte et insipiens ? (Deut« 
xxxii.) Ungrateful men! Insensible Christians! Is 
this your gratitude for your Saviour, and for your 
God? 

No, no, Lord ; it shall never be true that Thou art 
so universally abandoned ; it shall never be true that 
Thou canst not find any one to participate in Thy 
sorrow. I ask of Thee, oh Lord, that Thou wouldst 
pour, from Thy Heart into mine, one drop of that torrent 
of bitterness with which Thine was inundated, at the 
sight of so much ingratitude and so many insults, that, 
if I am not happy enough, to be able to blot out my sins, 
by the shedding of all my blood, I may be at least 
afflicted enough, to wash them away continually by 
my tears. 

Second Point.— The sentiments of the Heart of Jesus Christ 
at the sight of the outrages, which He should have to endure 
from the malice of heretics. 

Consider that the second object of the fear, and of 
the terrible sadness, in which the Heart of the Son of 
God was plunged, was the number of the outrages and 
injuries, that He would have to endure, from the malice 
of heretics, to the end of ages, and which His imagi- 
nation represented to Him, with all the circumstances 
that added to His affliction, without diminishing 
them or concealing any of them from Him. Nothing 
is more painful to a generous heart than ingratitude, 
especially when accompanied by great contempt. But 
the most enormous of all ingratitude is that, by 
which man not only does not correspond with the 
benefits he has received, but even denies that he has 
ever received such benefits, in order to be at liberty to 
ill-use his benefactor, without being considered un- 
grateful. Jesus Christ knew distinctly, at that time, 
that there would be great numbers of Christians, 
who would renew, in His Sacred Body in the 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS, 



821 



Adorable Eucharist, all the outrages of which the 
malice of demons could be capable. That, to be at 
liberty to exercise upon Him all their fury and rage, 
they would carry their malice so far, as to deny in the 
Adorable Eucharist, the real presence of the Body of 
Jesus Christ. 

Who would have believed that men could be capable 
of such excessive malice, and who can imagine any- 
thing more afflicting, than to see, that the most wonderr 
ful mark of the greatest love, is made use of only to heap 
injuries on Him, Who has so much loved us ? Hiss 
imagination represented clearly to Jesus Christ, all that 
has happened in these latter ages. He saw His temples 
profaned, His Altars demolished, His Priests murdered, 
and His Adorable Body thrown to the ground, trampled 
under foot, and made the object of the scoffs and in- 
solence of the greatest sinners, the horror and the 
execration of impious men. 

What must have been the sentiments of this tender 
and generous Heart ? Was it necessary, oh Lord, to 
work so great a miracle, to furnish men with a means 
of treating Thee so unworthily ? Was it necessary, 
through an excess of love, to remain with them unto 
the end of ages, to be until the end of ages, the object 
of their contempt and of their rage ? Is not such a 
picture, enough to wither a heart with grief and sad- 
ness ? Art Thou then, O King of glory, He Whom I 
see in so many places covered with insult and ignominy ? 
Art Thou the God of Majesty before Whom the Sera- 
phim bow down with respect, Whom I see so insolently 
treated by the wretched worms of the earth ? Art Thou 
an object of horror and execration to Thy creatures, to 
Thy slaves, to Thy own children, and all this because 
Thou hast loved them too much ? 

Who could ever have imagined, that there would be 
in man, an excess of malice, equivalent to the excess 
of Thy goodness, an excess of ingratitude, correspond- 



Digitized by Google 



322 



MEDITATIONS. 



ing so to speak with the excess of love with which Thou 
hast loved us ? 

But, my beloved Saviour, should not I be guilty of 
worse ingratitude if, in considering Thy sentiments at 
the sight of such cruel ingratitude, I were myself 
insensible to Thy grief? 

Here is the place, oh Lord, where I see Thee, as 
Thy Prophet has described Thee : the last of men, the 
man of sorrows (Isa. liii. 8). Heretics have treated 
Thee as the last and most contemptible of men, and 
have fulfilled the Prophecy which said, that Thou 
shouldst be satiated with insults : satwrabitur oppro- 
briis (Thren. iii. 80). But oh my God, will these here- 
tics, these inhuman children, these impious men never 
be satisfied with treating Thee so insolently, with offer- 
ing Thee such outrages ? And shall I never be touched 
by seeing Thee so Hi-treated? This sad picture, this 
sight made Thee even sweat blood. I beg of Thee 
that it may move me to tears, and that if my heart 
cannot feel that grief which oppressed Thine, the con- 
fusion I feel at being so insensible to Thy sufferings 
may supply in some degree for my insensibility. 

Third Point. — The sentiments of the Heart of Jesus Christ 
at the sight of the ingratitude of the greater number of the 
faithful. 

Consider that it was no less an object of affliction 
and sadness for Jesus Christ, to see the ingratitude of 
the greater number of the faithful themselves, who 
would show only coldness, indifference, and forgetful- 
ness towards this most loving Saviour. He saw the 
little esteem, not to say contempt, that would be felt 
for the greatest proof of the most ardent love. He saw 
that whatever He might do to be loved by the faithful, 
and to be continually with them by instituting the 
adorable Eucharist, neither this excess of love, nor His 
benefits, nor even His presence would have power to 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



323 



oblige them to love Him, nor to prevent them from for- 
getting Him. He represented to Himself those 
Churches wherein He dwells for the greater part of 
the time, without adorers. He foresaw the want of 
respect and reverence with which persons would behave 
in His presence. He saw clearly, how many would 
be found, who, losing entire hours in vain conversa- 
tion, or useless visits, or spending the greater part of 
the day in idleness, would never find time, or rather 
would never be in the humour, to spend a quarter of 
an hour at the foot of His Altars. Lastly, £ow many 
who would not be induced to visit Him at all, and who 
would scarcely go, once in eight days, to adore Him 
with coldness. He knew how many others would 
visit Him without devotion, and how much irreverence 
and formality there would be in these visits ; and lastly 
how few would visit Him with eagerness. This loving 
Saviour knew distinctly, that the greater number would 
trouble themselves no more about Him, than if He were 
not upon earth, or as if when on earth, He were not 
the same as in Heaven. 

When He foresaw that Jews, Gentiles, and heretics 
would feel nothing for Him but hardness and contempt, 
this bad treatment caused Him extreme pain; but, 
after all, these are His declared enemies : and what do 
we expect from an enemy ? But, what pained Him most 
was, that those who acknowledge His benefits, that the 
little flock which professes fidelity towards Him, thatHis 
own children should be insensible to His benefits, and 
should not be touched at the sight of the grief caused 
Him by these insults, nay should also despise Him by 
their irreverences and sacrileges. If Gentiles, Turks, 
and men who are professedly wicked, had vomited forth 
abuse against Me, I would have borne it without com- 
plaining, might the loving Saviour say : Si immicus 
maledixisset mihi, sustinuissem utique. (Ps. liv. 3). But 



Digitized by Google 



224 



MEDITATIONS. 



that Christians, Catholics, of whom I have been not only 
the Redeemer, but am still the daily food ; that my own 
children should feel nothing for me but ^difference, that 
they should even treat me with contempt ! Tu veto 
homo unanimis qui simul mecum dulces capiebas cibos ! 
(Ibid.) 

At this sight, at this thought, what were the senti- 
ments of the Heart of Jesus Christ ? that is of the most 
tender and generous Heart that ever existed ; of a Heart 
that loves the hearts of men passionately, and Who meets 
in the hearts of these very men with nothing but cold- 
ness, hardness, and contempt. Super omnes inimicos 
tneos, He says by the mouth of His Prophet (Ps. xxx. 
12), f actus sum opprobrium: I have been made the 
sport and the laughing-stock of My enemies. At 
least amidst the insults that I have received, I 
should have met with a great number of servants and 
devoted friends, but it is quite the contrary : Qui vide- 
bant me foras fugerunt a me. (Ibid.) Scarcely did I 
disguise Myself under the feeble forms of bread, to 
which the excess of My love has reduced Me for the 
sake of the pleasure of being continually with men, than 
they removed further from Me, they forsook Me, they 
forgot Me as One Who had no place in their heart ; 
Oblivioni datus sum tanquam mortuus a corde. 

But did our loving Saviour, in representing all 
this to Himself, exaggerate the cause of His grief 
and sadness ? Did this frightful picture deceive 
Him, which placed before Him so many insults, and 
outrages, and so extraordinary an insensibility in the 
hearts of so many Christians? Is it then true that 
Jesus Christ has been treated thus ? Is it true that 
His people have been insensible to this ill-treatment ? 
Alas ! It is enough for me to reflect on my own sen- 
timents, and am not I a prodigy of insensibility, if in 
considering all this, I am still unmoved ? Ah Lord ! 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 225 

can I think of all this, and at the same time reflect, that 
it is a God who suffered this fearful sadness, in which 
His Heart was plunged at the sight of so much insult 
and dishonour, that it is a God who willingly accepted 
and hore this opprobrium and this disgrace for me, 
and not die of grief and love ? If a man or a slave,' 
had suffered the hundredth part of what Jesus Christ 
has endured, and still bears daily on our Altars, for 
the love of us, we could not refuse to love Him, to be 
grateful to Him, to give Him at least marks of com- 
passion, and to say sometimes: That poor unhappy man 
really loved me, and he would not have borne so much, 
if he had not loved me so dearly." Shall it be only the 
proofs of the love of Jesus Christ, still daily forgotten 
and despised in the Adorable Eucharist, ill-treated for 
the love of us, to which we shall be insensible, and 
what is more, which we shall repay t>nly by ingratitude 
and coldness ? Can it be that the heart of man is 
capable of such an excess of hardness and insensi- 
bility ? Alas ! Lord, it is but too capable of it, and it 
will soon give proof of it, if that love which has obliged 
Thee to expose Thyself to such indignities and out- 
rages for it, does not force Thee to soften its hardness, 
and warm its coldness, to make it feel its injuries to Thee, 
and render it capable of Thy love. For of what use 
would be all the miracles Thou hast wrought, and all 
the torments Thou has endured, but to harden and 
make me more guilty, if I were not touched by them, 
if I did not feel grateful, and if I did not love Thee 
more in consequence ? As I hope, oh Lord, that Thou 
wilt not refuse me Thy grace, I make at this moment 
a strong resolution, to give Thee in future undoubted 
proofs of my love, and of my just gratitude. I have 
been until now, insensible to Thy benefits, insensible 
to Thy sufferings, indifferent towards Thee, though I 
know that Thou art continually with us. I have great 
reason, my loving Saviour, to feel diffidence in my 

Q 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



promises and resolutions, having been hitherto, so in- 
constant and unfaithful in Thy service ; but it seems 
to me, that Thy mercy now inspires me with greater 
courage, and that I shall be in future more constant 
and faithful, in the promise I make Thee, of showing, by 
my respect in Thy presence, by my frequent visits, and 
by my assiduity in attending upon Thee, the sincere 
devotion I feel to thy Sacred Heart, and the ardent 
desire I entertain, of repairing as far as possible, during 
the rest of my days, by my respect, and every kind of 
homage, all the contempt and the outrages, Thou hast 
endured in the adorable Eucharist, as also the forget- 
fulness and the extraordinary indifference that are 
shown towards Thy adorable Person in the Blessed 
Sacrament : DUigam te Domine irirtus mea, Dominus 
firmamentum meum, est refugium meum. (Ps. xvii. I.) 



Different Subjects of Meditation for the 
Fridays in each Month. 

Besides the Meditation assigned for the first Friday 
in each month, which is a day more specially con- 
secrated to the honour of the Sacred Heart of Jesus, 
I have thought it well to assign here various subjects 
of Meditation for the Fridays in the year, which are 
also days destined, to honour this Sacred Heart in 
a particular manner. The subject of these Medita- 
tions is taken, from those parts of the Gospel, which 
relate to the sadness Jesus Christ has felt, during the 
time of His mortal life, and in which He has testified 
more feelingly, the excessive affliction with which His 
Heart was pierced. Let us afterwards consider the 
sentiments of this afflicted Heart, as applicable to 
those which He has reason to experience, on account of 
the coldness, the contempt, and the outrages, that He 
daily receives in the adorable Eucharist, where alas, 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS* 227 

wicked Christians, too often, renew the treatment, He 
has received from the Jews. I have endeavoured as 
far as possible, that these subjects should be in ac- 
cordance, with the Gospels of the Sundays in the year, 
I will give rather more at length, the two points of 
the first of these Meditations, but for fear of adding too 
much to the size of this book, will give only the subjects 
of the others, making upon each, a few reflections, in 
conformity with the intention we should propose to 
ourselves, in these Meditations. 

JANUARY. 

Meditation for the Second Fbidat in Januaby. 

Si opera non fecissem in eis, qua nemo alius fecit, pec- 
catum non haberent ; nunc autem et viderunt, et oderunt 
me et Patrem. (Jom xv. 24.) 

If I had not wrought amongst them works that no 
other has ever done, they would not have sinned, 
but now they have seen them, and they have hated 
Me and my Father. 

First Point. 

Consider, that if the Jews had not been visibly con- 
vinced, by the testimony of the Prophets, as they ought 
to have been, that Jesus Christ was the Messiah, the 
wonders alone which he wrought, ought to have gained 
Him the veneration of all, and his most amiable virtues, 
His indefatigable zeal for their salvation, His excessive 
meekness, and above all, the wonderful benefits He 
bestowed on this people, in favour of whom, all these 
prodigies were wrought, ought to have gained for Him, 
the hearts of all who knew Him. 

All these things however have a quite contrary 
effect. Jesus Christ is persecuted, hated, and treated 
worse than the greatest criminal in the world. Have 

Q 2 



Digitized by Google 



228 MEDITATIONS. 

His benefits and His miracles been forgotten? No, 
certainly. Men remember them and speak of them : 
but they almost impute to Him as a crime these benefits 
and these miracles, and He is only treated so ill by the 
Jews, because He has loved them too much, and has 
been too liberal towards them. Conceive, if possible; 
what must have been the sentiments of Jesus Christ ; 
what was the affliction of His Heart, at the sight of 
such enormous ingratitude. 

Second Point. 

But consider, what must His thoughts be now, 
seeing Himself daily so unworthily treated in the 
adorable Eucharist by Christians themselves, though 
He only instituted the adorable Eucharist, to satisfy 
His excessive love, for these very Christians. If Jesus 
Christ had not wrought this miracle, if Jesus Christ 
had not loved us to this excess, should we have any 
reason for not loving Him ? Ungrateful Christians, 
what do you think of it? Has this loving Saviour 
done enough to deserve your love ? and if His excessive 
love has moved Him, so to speak, to do too much, 
ought this excess of love«to induce us not to love Him, 
and to despise Him? This is however what follows 
from the institution of this adorable mystery. He 
shall be satiated with insults, said the Prophet. He 
shall be the last and the most despised of men ; and is 
not this prophecy daily verified towards Jesus Christ, 
since we have witnessed the miracle He has wrought in 
our favour, by the institution of the most Blessed 
Sacrament ? The ingratitude and impiety of the Jews 
excite in us a just indignation against that wicked 
nation; we see however these impieties and this in- 
gratitude continually renewed, in the insults, to which 
we know that love exposes Jesus Christ, in the Adorable 
Eucharist, and shall we never be touched by them ? 

I have been hitherto insensible, oh Lord, I have been 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



229 



ungrateful: I have even done what would seem im- 
possible, since, by an unheard of prodigy, and which 
has no example, except in regard of God, not only 
have I corresponded with Thy benefits only by out- 
rages, but I have also, if I dare say it, almost made 
the greatness of my treachery, and of my ingratitude 
towards Thee, equal the greatness of Thy goodness 
and mercy for me. Continue oh Lord, this mercy, 
notwithstanding all my infidelities, but all that I ask 
now, is, either to die of grief, or to live in a continual 
repentance, for having so little loved a God Who has 
loved me to excess, and Who continually gives me, in 
the Eucharist, the most manifest proof of the greatest 
love that ever existed. 

I will love Thee in future, oh my Saviour ; I will 
begin from this moment, to render Thee my homage in 
the most Blessed Sacrament, with assiduity and fervour. 
The modesty and respect with which I will behave 
in future in Thy presence, my devotion to Thy Sacred 
Heart, and my ardent desire, of repairing as far as 
possible, by the help of Thy grace, all the outrages 
I have been guilty of, and those which Thou daily 
receivest in the Adorable Eucharist, shall be a con- 
vincing proof that I have begun in earnest to love 
Thee ; grant that I may never cease to do so. Amen. 

Meditation for the Third Friday in January. 

Et scandalizabantur in eo ; Jesus autem dixit eis : Non 
est Propheta sine honore nisi inpatria sua et domo sua. 
(Matt. xiii. 57 et 58.) 

They were scandalized in His regard. But Jesus said 
to them : A Prophet is not without honour, save in 
his own country, and in his own house, and He wrought 
not many miracles there, because of their unbelief. 

In what could Jesus Christ be a subject of scandal, 



Digitized by Google 



230 



MEDITATIONS. 



if not in concealing Himself too much, and being too 
cautious and circumspect ? The love which He bears 
us, is excessive and boundless ; but this love, which 
ought to gain Him the hearts of all men, procures Him 
nothing but contempt. Those, amongst whom He had 
dwelt longest, are they who know Him the least, and 
who render themselves most unworthy of His graces ; 
and, as He finds faithful servants only among strangers, 
it is only amongst them, that He works His greatest 
miracles, and bestows His benefits most liberally. 

It is extraordinary, that a Prophet should be without 
honour, only in his own country, and his own house, but 
it is much more extraordinary that Jesus Christ should 
receive, in His own house, so many insults, that He 
should be so little known to those, among whom He 
continually dwells, and so little loved, by those, even, to 
whom He is known. It is extraordinary, that when He 
opens to us, all His treasures in the Blessed Sacrament, 
and gives Himself to us, we feel so little the effects of 
His presence; and that those who approach Him the 
nearest, and the most frequently, are not always the most 
holy, and do not constantly love Him more and more I 
It is extraordinary^ that Jesus Christ, Who is continually 
amongst us, works so few miracles ; that, on the con- 
trary, He should be to many a subject of scandal ; but 
will it not be yet more unaccountable, if, making these 
reflections to-day myself, I do not love Jesus Christ 
more, I remain insensible to the insults He receives in 
this adorable mystery, and do not adopt all possible 
means to repair them ? 

Meditation for the Fourth Friday in January. 

Dixit autem dominus mnem : Quid faciam ? Mittam 
JUium dilectum ; forsitan cum huncvideiint, verebuntur. 
Quern cum vidissent coloni, ejectum ilium extra vineam, 
ccciderunt. (Luc. xx. 13 et 15.) 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



231 



Then the Lord of the vineyard said : What shall I do ? I 
will send my beloved Son ; it may be, when they 
see him, they will reverence him. Whom, when the 
husbandmen saw, casting him out of the vineyard, 

. they killed him. 

The meaning of this sad parable is too clearly exem- 
plified in the person of Jesus Christ, Whom the Jews 
treated in this manner ; but is not the accomplishment 
of this parable, renewed daily among Christians, by the 
unworthy manner in which Jesus Christ is treated, 
every day, in the most Blessed Sacrament ? 

Could the Eternal Father make use of a more 
suitable means of gaining faithful servants, than to 
send them His only Son? and could Jesus Christ 
Himself invent a more powerful means, of being 
honoured and loved, than by instituting the Adorable 
Eucharist ? But is Jesus Christ loved more ? Is He 
not, on the contrary, more dishonoured? Does the 
ingratitude of the Jews touch us, and are we unmoved 
by our own ? It is a most astonishing fact, that neither 
the presence of J esus Christ, His meekness, His benefits, 
or His miracles have been able to gain the hearts of 
these infidels ; and how long shall the real presence of 
Jesus Christ in the adorable Eucharist, His abjection, 
His silence, His benefits, and all the favours He is ready 
to bestow on us, have no power whatever over the hearts 
of Christians ? 

FEBRUARY. 

Meditation for the Second Friday in February. 

Et dixit ad Mariam matrem ejus : Ecce positus est hie in 
ruinam et in resurrectionem muUorum in Israel, et in 
signum cui contradicetur. (Luc. ii. 34.) 

Simeon said to Mary, His Mother : Behold this child 
is set for the fall and for the resurrection of many in 
Israel, and for a sign which shall be contradicted. 



Digitized by Google 



232 



MEDITATIONS. 



This prediction transfixed, like a sword, the heart of 
Mary, but what impression did it not make on the Heart 
of the Son ? Jesus Christ offered Himself to His Eternal 
Father, for the salvation of all men, and the price which 
He offered, infinitely exceeded the debt He had to pay. 
This sacrifice immolated for all, will, however, be use- 
less to a great number, and this infinite, price, offered 
for all men, will be for the ruin, and the resurrection of 
many. This same victim offers and immolates Himself, 
still daily, on our Altars, by His Priests, for our salva- 
tion, and can we not say, that this same victim is for 
the ruin of many? and how should it be otherwise, 
since He is always a sign for the contradiction of meni 
Some refuse to acknowledge Jesus Christ ; others recog- 
nize, yet despise Him ; the greater number forget Him, 
and even those who think of Him, are not always grate- 
ful. It was not enough, oh my divine Saviour, that this 
propheqy should be fulfilled in Thy life-time ; it must 
be renewed daily, by the contempt shown to Thy sacred 
Person, in the Blessed Sacrament. It pierces with 
grief the soul of the Mother, and shall it never touch 
our hearts ? 

Meditation for the Third Friday in February. 

Assumpsit autem Jesus duodecim, et ait Hits : Ecce ascen- 
dimus Jerosolymam, et consummabuntur omnia qua 
scripta sunt per Prophetas de Filio hominis. Tradetur 
enim gentibus, et ittudetur, et flagellabitur, et conspuetur. 
(Luc. xviii. 31 et 32.) 

Then Jesus took unto Him the twelve, and said to 
them : Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and all things 
shall be accomplished which were written by the 
Prophets concerning the Son of Man, for He shall 
be delivered to the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, 
and scourged, and spit upon. 

What must then have been the sentiments of Jesus 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



233 



Christ! Do you see, He said to His Apostles, this 
people, whom I have so greatly benefited, and in whose 
favour I have wrought so many miracles ? This nation 
will repay these great benefits, by the most enormous 
ingratitude ; I shall place Myself in their hands, and 
they will give Me up to the Gentiles ; I shall become 
an object of hatred to the people, the butt of the soldiers, 
the sport of courtiers, and a victim sacrificed to the 
malice, and the impiety of the Priests. There will be 
no insult, that I shall not suffer, no outrage, that I shall 
not receive, no torment, that I shall not be made to 
endure. But what would this loving Saviour have 
answered, had He been then asked why, foreseeing all 
this, He would place Himself in their hands ; if not, 
that His love was still greater than these outrages, 
and that He exposes Himself, with pleasure, to all these 
insults, to show us the excess of His love ? All this is 
daily renewed in the Adorable Eucharist. Jesus Christ 
has still the same sentiments in our favour ; but, my 
God, what are my sentiments in regard of Jesus Christ, 
Who is so little loved, and so much ill-treated ? 

Meditation for the Fourth Friday in February, 

Qmnibusque mirantibus in omnibus qua faciebat, dixit ad 
Discipvlos mos : Ponite vos in cordibus vestris sermones 
iostos : Filim enim hominis futurum est, ut tradatur in 
tnanus hominum. (Luc. ix. 44.) 

But while all wondered at all the things He did, He 
said to His disciples : Lay you up in your hearts 
these words, for it shall come to pass that the Son 
of man shall be delivered into the hands of men. 

It required an authority as great as that of Jesus 
Christ to convince His disciples, who were the wit- 
nesses of His miracles, that these prodigies, which 
gained Him the admiration of all, would not prevent 



Digitized by Google 



334 



MEDITATIONS. 



men from ill-using Him. The Jews would not love, 
Jesus Christ, and to he at liberty to ill-treat Him, they, 
shut their eyes, that they might not know Him. 
Heretics follow in this the example of the Jews, but 
who would ever have believed that men would be found, 
who would treat Jesus Christ, with the highest degree 
of insult and contempt, in the Adorable Eucharist, 
while they professed to believe, that it was Jesus Christ, 
Whom they were treating so unworthily ? 

Lord, Thou didst command Thy disciples to lay up 
in their hearts these truths, grant they may penetrate 
deeply into mine. 

MARCH. 

Meditation for the Second Fbiday in Maech. 

Tristis est anima mea usque ad mortem ; swtinete hie et 
vigilate mecum . . . et venit ad Discipulos, et invenit 
eos dormientes, et dixit Petro : Sic rum pottdstU una 
hora vigilare mecum t (Matt xxvi. 38 et 40.) 

My soul is sorrowful even unto death ; stay you here 
and watch with Me. — And He cometh to His dis- 
ciples, and findeth them asleep. And He saith to 
Peter : What ! Could you not watch one hour with 
Me? 

We must be very little touched by the affliction of a 
friend, when we repose tranquilly, at the time that we 
see him plunged in the greatest sadness. But how 
painful is this indifference, to a man in deep affliction ! 
There were then only three Apostles with Jesus Christ, 
and the pitiable state to which this divine Saviour is 
reduced, cannot induce them to remain in His com- 
pany, and to watch only one hour with Him. Jesus 
Christ is ordinarily neglected in the Eucharist, and 
how few, even of those who profess to follow Him, and 
lpve Him, are touched by the injuries He receives. 
Jesus Christ is continually about to be betrayed, into 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



235 



the hands of His mortal enemies, and how few, even of 
those, who flatter themselves they are faithful to Jesus 
Christ, come to the foot of our Altars, to spend some 
time in His company ; and to how many, might Jesus 
Christ make daily this reproof : Could you not watch 
one hour with Me ? What answer could I make, oh 
Lord, who lose so many hours in foolish amusements, 
and diversions of vanity ? 

Meditation for the Third Friday in March. 

Et confestim accedens ad Jesum, dixit : Ave Rabbi, et os- 
cvlatus est eum : dixitque iUi Jesus : Amice, ad quid 
venisti ? (Matt. xxvi. 46.) Juda, oscvlo FUium ho- 
minis tradis ? (Luc. xxii. 48.) 

And forthwith coming to Jesus, he said : " Hail Rabbi, 
and he kissed Him. Jesus said to him : Friend, 
whereto art thou come ? Judas, dost thou betray 
the Son of man with a kiss ?" 

It is very painful to see an ungrateful man adding 
deception to malice, trying to deceive us with false 
appearances, and making use of familiarity, and the 
marks of the greatest friendship, to destroy us. My 
divine Saviour, what must be Thy sentiments, in seeing 
that crowd of Christians, whom Thou so eagerly invitest 
to Thy banquet, and admittest with so much love to Thy 
table? Thou givest them in this, the strongest proof 
of excessive love, and they perform an action, which is 
in itself, a visible mark of the affection they ought to 
have for Thee ; but to how many of them cotddst Thou 
say : Friend, why earnest thou hither ? dost thou thus 
betray Me with a kiss ? To how many impure souls 
art Thou given ? to how many hearts stained with 
vice? How many sacrileges are committed under a 
false appearance of piety ? Shall I, oh my God, be 
always insensible to this ? 



Digitized by Google 



286 



MEDITATIONS. 



Meditation for the Fourth Friday in March. 

Mttites autem duxerunt eum in atrium Prcetorii, et convo- 
cant totam cohortem, et caperunt salutare eum, Ave 
Bex Judaorum, et percutiebant caput ejus arundine : 
et conspuebant eum : et ponentes genua adorabant eum. 
(Marc. xv. 16, 18 et 19.) 

And the soldiers led Him away into the court of 
the Palace, and they call together the whole band, 
and they began to salute Him, Hail King of the 
Jews, and they struck His head with a reed, and 
they did spit on Him, and bowing their knees, they 
adored Him. 

Gould the most infamous, and the most wicked among 
men receive worse treatment ? But these painful in- 
sults, these outrages, this unheard of cruelty, which the 
Jews exercised towards the adorable Person of Jesus 
Christ, at the most lasted only a few hours, and they 
have been accompanied by the tears, that compassion 
and love have drawn, from so many faithful servants of 
Jesus Christ, in many centuries. But is not this sad 
tragedy daily renewed, in the outrages that are offered 
to Jesus Christ, in the most Blessed Sacrament. And 
what is this contempt, but what has been renewed 
a hundred times by infidels and wicked Christians? 
How many seem only to enter the house of God, to insult 
Him ? How many dishonour by their ill-behaviour, 
the sanctity of our most tremendous mysteries ? Oh my 
Saviour, that there were at least many faithful servants 
who would be truly grieved, to see Thee every day so 
greatly dishonoured, so little loved, and so ill-used ! 

APRIL. 

Meditation for the Second -Friday in April. 
PUatus autem iterum respondem ait iZZw, Quid ergo vuUU 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS* 



287 



faciam Regi Judaorum ? At iUi iterum clamaverunt : 
Crucifige eum. (1 Marc. xv. 12 et 18.) 

And Pilate again answering, saith to them: What 
will you, then, that I do to the King of the Jews. 
But they cried out the more : Crucify Him, Crucify 
Him. 

It might be said, that they know not what to do with 
Jesus Christ, that He is become useless. To hear 
Pilate and the Jews, Jesus Christ is fit for nothing, 
but to be despised, outraged, and crucified. Unhappy 
people ! dost thou not know what to do with that 
Divine Saviour, Who has been specially given to Thee ? 
This Saviour shall be taken from thee, and given 
to the Gentiles and to the barbarous nations, who will 
know how to profit, by that mysterious stone, which 
thou hast rejected. Jesus Christ is still really present 
in the most Blessed Sacrament; but is Jesus Christ in 
the Blessed Sacrament more useful to us? Do we 
know the treasure that we possess ? Are we well aware of 
the value of this precious victim, and do we profit by 
the benefits we therein possess ? Unhappy countries ! 
Unfortunate kingdoms, in which heresy rules with so 
much tyranny, your abuse and contempt of this august 
Sacrament have reached the utmost height, you have 
not known what to do with this divine Saviour, and 
this divine Saviour has been taken from you, and carried 
at the same time, to the Indians, and savages. But 
my God ! have I known how to profit by the presence, 
and dwelling with us, of this divine Saviour ? 

Meditation fob the Third Friday in April. 

PUatus autem cum audisset hos sermones, adduxit foras 
Jesum, et dixit JucUeis : Ecce Bex vester ; iUi autem 
clamabant : Telle, tolle, crucifige eum : tunc ergo tra- 
didit eis ilium ut crucifigeretur. (Joan xix. 18, 15, 16.) 



Digitized by Google 



238 



MEDITATIONS, 



Now when Pilate had heard these words, he brought 
Jesus forth, and he saith to the Jews. Behold your 
King : but they cried out : away with Him, away 
with Him, crucify Him. Then therefore he delivered 
Him to them for to be crucified. 

Jesus Christ was no longer to be recognized : the rage 
of the Jews had reduced Him, to so horrible a con- 
dition, that it was necessary, that the judge himself 
should tell them, that it was Jesus Christ, Whom he was 
presenting before them. This spectacle would have 
touched the hearts of the most barbarous : the Jews 
themselves would have felt compassion, they would 
have been touched by it, had He been any other than 
Jesus Christ. Behold then this divine Saviour, given 
up to the rage of these furies. Behold Thee then 
satiated with torments and opprobrium, my adorable 
Saviour! Thy love has carried things to the last 
extremity. Was not this enough, without again ex- 
posing Thyself daily in the Blessed Sacrament te 
similar treatment ! Was not this too much ? Yes, He 
will answer, it is too much to appease My Father, 
too much for extinguishing the hatred of My enemies, 
too much for cancelling the sins of the whole world, 
too much for extinguishing all the fires of hell : but it 
is not enough, to show Christians the excess of My 
love. This sufficed to soften My judge and My 
executioners, and to split rocks asunder ; but, neither 
the remembrance of My past torments, nor the view of 
the outrages I continually suffer, are sufficient to move 
the hearts of Christians. Oh hardness ! oh insen- 
sibility ! In effect, all these excesses are incapable 
of overcoming my indifference. I daily see Jesus 
Christ insulted in the Adorable Eucharist, and I daily 
see it with carelessness and coldness. 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



239 



Meditation for the Fourth Friday in April. 

Venit Jesus januis clausis, et stetit in medio, et dixit : Pax 
vobis ; deinde dixit ThorruB : Infer digitum tuum hue, et 
vide mantis meat, et offer manum tuam et mitte in 
latus meum, et noli esse incredulus, sed fidelis. 
(Joan. xx. 26, 27.) 

Jesus cometh, the doors being shut, and stood in the 
midst, and said, Peace be to you : then He saith to 
Thomas, Put in thy finger hither and see My hands, 
and bring hither thy hand and put it into my side, 
and be not faithless, but believing. 

How attractive is this condescension ! and how much 
must He have loved this incredulous Apostle, to con- 
vince him by such persuasive and powerful means ! 
the mere sight of this opened side, inflamed with love 
the heart of this Apostle. Jesus Christ comes daily to 
us in the Blessed Sacrament; He gives us therein, 
the same Body, and in this sacred Body we find the 
same wounds : lastly, He gives us His Heart. He 
makes us touch It ; and all the fire with which It burns, 
has not yet had power to inflame ours. With what 
coldness do we depart from Communion ? we are wholly 
frozen at Jesus Christ's feet The faith and the new 
fervour of St. Thomas, greatly rejoice the Heart of 
Jesus Christ, but what sentiments must He have 
of my insensibility and want of faith ? what sentiments 
ought I to have of it myself? 

MAY. 

Meditation for the Second Friday in May. 

Tanto tempore vobiscum sum, et non cognovistis me. 
(Joan xiv. 9.) 

So long a time have I been with you, and have you 
not known me ? 



Digitized by Google 



240 



MEDITATIONS. 



It seems as if it were impossible, to know Jesus Christ 
well, and not to love Him with tenderness: I know 
not therefore, if we can know Him well, and only 
love Him indifferently. The complaint which He 
makes to His Apostles, manifests to us the sentiments 
of His Heart. Though they had left all to follow Him, 
they did not yet love Him very fervently, because they 
did not know Him perfectly. But has not this divine 
Saviour more reason to give us the same reproof, and to 
say to us, I have been amongst you so long, I have 
been day and night with you, I am with you, only, for 
"the sake of the love I bear you, and still you do not 
know me. If you knew Me, would you leave Me 
alone the greater part of the time ? Would you care so 
little about visiting Me? Would you show so little 
modesty in My presence? Would you have so little 
confidence in Me, in your wants ? Would you not im- 
mediately have recourse to Me, in all the misfortunes 
of life, and could you easily separate yourselves from 
me, during the whole of your lives ? What answer 
should I be able to give ? 

Meditation fob the Third Friday in Mat. 

Dormite jam, et requiescite : Ecce Films hominis tradetur 
in manus peccatorum. (Marc. xiv. 41.) 

Sleep ye now and take your rest : behold the Son of 
man shall be betrayed into the hands of sinners. 

It is very painful to a person that loves much, to see 
himself forsaken in misfortune, by his best friends ;|but 
it is no less afflicting, to see that the few friends, who 
profess to remain faithful, are not at all touched by his 
misfortunes, and even take no part in his distress. 
Jesus Christ in the most Blessed Sacrament, is outraged 
by the greater number of men, He is daily given up 
therein to the hands of sinners, and the greater part of 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



241 



those who profess to love Him are not at all touched by 
the outrages He suffers, and do not even think of testi- 
fying any grief to Him, in seeing Him so unworthily 
treated. You sleep, devout souls; religious persons, 
you repose, whilst Jesus Christ is contemned, and in- 
sulted on every side, in the Adorable Eucharist ! Here 
heretics profane the sacred vessels, and tread under foot 
the consecrated Hosts; there, sinners daily commit the 
most horrible sacrileges ; He is forgotten by all ; He is 
everywhere despised, and you do not feel this contempt, 
and you do nothing to show Him that you feel it ? It 
is in our power to repair these outrages in some degree, 
and are we indifferent to them, do we forget them ? 

Meditation for the Fourth Friday in May. 
Et ccspit pavere, et tadere. (Marc. xiv. 33.) 
Jesus began to fear, and to be heavy. 

A great soul, a truly generous heart seems not to 
suffer, in any extraordinary degree, at the sight of the 
injuries, the torments and the death it has itself chosen, 
and to which it submits spontaneously. But this Heart, 
which resists all torments, cannot be insensible to the 
ingratitude of those for whom it suffers, and this is 
certainly the affliction that causes the grief of Jesus 
Christ in this Mystery of His agony. I do not so much 
complain, He might say, of being dragged through the 
streets of Jerusalem, of being lacerated by scourges, of 
dying on an infamous cross ; all this is my free choice ; 
My love towards men would not allow Me to choose 
any other means ; but what does grieve Me is, that I 
should receive such ill-treatment in the Eucharist, the 
most excellent work of My love, and which I regarded 
as the most efficacious means of being more loved by 
men, and of thus obliging Myself to love them con- 
tinually more and more, of receiving their homages, 
and the reparation they would make by their adorations 

R 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



for the terrible outrages I have received from the Jews; 
that this should be the place where I receive the 
greatest insults, where I am continually forgotten, ill- 
treated, and despised even by those who make a pro- 
fession of piety! 

JUNE. 

Meditation for the Second Friday in June. 

Ego mm panis vita : qui venit ad me, non esuriet ; et qui 
credit in me, non sitiet unquam : sed dixi vobis quia et 
vidistis me, et non creditis. (Joan. vi. 35 et 86.) 

I am the Bread of Life ; he who cometh to Me shall 
not hunger, and he who believeth in Me shall never 
thirst ; but I have said unto you, that you also have 
seen Me, and you believe not. 

A reproof is terrible after a benefit of such a nature. 
It is as if Jesus Christ had said : My children, I have 
not been satisfied with giving My Blood for your ran- 
som ; I give you My Body also to be your food : to die 
for another is the greatest proof of love, but it would 
not be for Me, the greatest proof of love, unless I re- 
newed this sacrifice every day, and a hundred times 
every day : unless, being unable to die more than once, 
I placed Myself continually, for the love of you, in a 
state of death in the Blessed Sacrament. Yet, I have 
already said it, you have seen Me, and you love Me 
little, because your faith is so lamentably weak. Un- 
grateful Christians ! You see what this loving Saviour 
has done for you, you see what He does da3y in the 
Eucharist, and do you love Him more ? If you are so 
little touched by what He does for you, might you not at 
least be moved, by what you yourselves do against Him? 

Meditation for the Third Friday in Junb. 
Et misit nuntios ante conspectum mum : et euntes intra- 
verunt in cwitatem Samaritanorum, ut pararent illi ; et 
non receperunt eum. (Luc. ix, 52 et 53.) 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



243 



And He sent messengers before His face, and going 
they entered into a city of the Samaritans to prepare 
for Him. And they received Him not. 

What opinion do we entertain of these unhappy Sa- 
maritans? what a happiness would it have been for 
them had they known Who it was, that presented 
Himself at their gate, and to whom they refused an 
entrance into their town ! But what were then the 
sentiments of the Heart of Jesus Christ, when the dis- 
ciples related to Him, the manner in which they had 
been treated, and the contempt that was shown for His 
Person ? These unhappy people are not, however, 
alone : there have been at all times Samaritans of this 
kind, who have refused the disciples of Jesus Christ an 
entrance into their city, who have even driven from it 
Jesus Christ Himself. Besides almost the whole of 
Africa and the Eastern countries, many others have 
chased Him away. In how many countries of Europey 
miserably buried in heresy, is He not refused to be 
recognised in the Sacrament of His love, and this 
adorable Saviour sees Himself, so to speak, banished 
from them ? Oh that He were at least better receiyed 
by the rest of Christians ! That He were a little more 
loved, and less unworthily treated even by those who 
receive Him ! 

Meditation for the Fourth Friday in June. 

Et eoderunt Phariscd, et cceperunt conquirere db Mo sig- 
num de calo, tentantes eum; et ingemiscens spiritu, ait: 
Quid generatio ista signum quarit 1 (Marc. viii. 11 
etl8.) 

And the Pharisees came forth, and began to question 
with Him, asking Him a sign from Heaven, and 
tempting Him. And sighing deeply in spirit, He 
saith : " Why doth this generation ask a sign ?" 

This sigh conveys a reproof, and such a reproof is 

r 2 



Digitized by Google 



244 



MEDITATIONS. 



well founded. This Sacred Heart feels most deeply, 
the insensibility and the malice of the Pharisees. 
There was not a city or a town, through which Jesus 
Christ had passed, that had not published His miracles. 
They might themselves have witnessed them a hundred 
times. But he who does not love those that work these 
wonders, is little touched either by what he sees or 
hears. We must feel little love for Jesus Christ, when 
the greatest and most loving of all miracles, that of the 
Eucharist, moves us so little. But, oh my loving 
Saviour, is not our insensibility itself, a miracle 
capable of touching our hearts ? it is a prodigy, oh my 
divine Saviour, capable of drawing sighs continually 
from Thy Heart, if it were still in a condition to be 
pierced with sorrow and grief. But, my God, mine is 
capable of grief and sadness ; grant that it may at least 
feel strongly in future, the little honour it pays Thee, 
and the injury it does Thee. 

JULY. 

Meditation for the Second Fbidat in July. . 

Cldmaverunt ergo rursum omnes, dicentes : Non hunc. 
(Joan, xviii. 40.) 

Then cried they all again, saying : Not this man. 

Whence could arise so extraordinary a hatred, and 
what could render Jesus Christ so odious to them ? 
What sick person was ever presented to Him that, He 
refused to cure ? what person in distress, ever turned 
to Him, whom He would not relieve? This hatred and 
this fury of the Jews terrify us, and certainly grieved 
the Heart of Jesus Christ. But, my Saviour, are there 
not even now hearts, which nourish a similar hatred, 
against the most august, and the most loving of all 
Thy sacraments ? How many heretics are there, who, 
refusing to recognize Thee, in this excellent work 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS, 



245 



of Thy love, cry out still daily, " We will have nothing 
to do with this man ?" how many bad Catholics, who, 
refusing to receive Thee under some vain pretext, or 
receiving Thee unworthily, cry out, "We will have 
nothing to do with this man?" Lastly, how many 
persons, who are considered to lead a very regular life, 
show evidently, by their forgetfulness, their indifference 
towards Thee, and the difficulty they feel in visiting 
Thee in this adorable mystery, that they do not know 
how to value Thee ? Have I not been, am I not now, 
of this number ? 

Meditation fob the Third Friday in July. 

Ego veni in nomine Patris mei, et non accipitis me ; si 
alius venerit in nomine suo, ilium accipietis ? (Joan v. 
43.) 

I am come in the name of My Father, and you receive 
Me not ; if another shall come in his own name, him 
you will receive. 

How reasonable is this reproof? but how penetrating, 
and of what a profound grief, in the heart of Him Who 
makes it, does it give evidence ? What would be the 
feelings of a Prince, if he saw the lowest servant of his 
Father received with honour, while he was treated with 
the utmost contempt ? We respect a man, whom we 
know to be sent from God ; the relics of those, who 
have given their blood for Jesus Christ, inspire us with 
the veneration' due to those generous martyrs; long 
journies even, are undertaken at great inconvenience to 
render them the honour which they deserve, and this 
piety is solid and praiseworthy. But is our devotion 
reasonable, when Jesus Christ Himself, really present 
at all times in the Holy Eucharist, cannot gain our 
respect? We feel no devotion towards the Blessed 
Sacrament ; we feel only disgust for this divine food ; 
we carry our dissipation even to the foot of the Altar ; 



Digitized by Google 



246 MEDITATIONS. 

we never find time to pay Him a visit ; can we not 
resolve to attend upon Him more assiduously ? 

Meditation for the Fourth Friday in July. 

Qui manducat mecum partem, levabit contra me calcaneum 
mum : cum hcec dixisset Jesus, turbatus est spiritu, et 
protestatus est, et dixit. (Joan xiii. 18 et 21.) 

He that eateth bread with me, shall lift up his heel 
against Me : when Jesus had said these things, He 
was troubled in spirit, and He testified and said . . . 

It required a great cause of affliction, to disturb a 
Heart as intrepid as that of Jesus Christ. But the 
contempt, that is shown for the Blessed Sacrament of 
the Altar, is to Him a motive of the most sensible 
grief, which He cannot conceal. This Divine Saviour 
was about to institute the Blessed Sacrament; His 
love presses Him, urges Him on, but His mind brings 
clearly before Him, all the outrages, to which this 
mystery would expose Him. This sad view plunges 
His Heart into an abyss of grief ; He sees that heretics, 
refusing to believe that He has loved us to such 
an excess, will make use of this excess of love, to out- 
rage Him most cruelly ; and also those impious men, 
professing to believe in Him, will commit horrible 
sacrileges. If this Divine Saviour had done for 
demons, the hundredth part of what He has done for 
men, would He have been so ill repaid ? O my Divine 
Saviour, these insults and this ingratitude have had 
power to trouble Thee, and shall I never be touched by 
them ! 

AUGUST. 

Meditation for the Second Friday in August. 

Ex hoc muUi discipvlorum ejus abierunt retro : etjam non 
cum Mo ambulabant ; dixit ergo Jesus ad duodecim : 
Numquid et vos vultis abire ? (Joan vi. 67, 68.) 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



247 



After this, many of His disciples went back and walked 
no more with Him. Then Jesus said to the twelve : 
Will you also go away ? 

This question came from a Heart so inflamed with 
love, and was in itself so strong a proof of excessive 
tenderness, that it could not fail to oblige those, to 
whom it was directed, to love Jesus Christ yet more 
ardently. It had also all the effect that this Divine 
Saviour desired ; and this increase of fervour in the 
Apostles, consoled Him a little, for the affliction He 
felt, at the departure of those who had forsaken Him. 
Jesus Christ often asks us the same question, and for 
the same reason. How happy should we be, if it had 
the same effect ! * Every day this loving Saviour sees 
Himself forsaken by those unhappy creatures, who, 
tired of His benefits, withdraw themselves from His 
Bervice. He is left alone. Faithful servants, fervent 
Christians, hear the question put to you by Jesus 
Christ : And you, He says, will you abandon Me ? Are 
you disgusted with this divine food, and tired of My 
service? will you act like those who go away, and 
come only with the crowd, to offer Me their homage 
mechanically, or to pass the time ? 

Meditation for the Third Friday in August. 

Dixit Uli Jesus : Vulpes foveas habent, et voliteres cceli 
nido8 : FUius autem haminis non habet ubi caput reclinet. 
(Luc. ix. 68.) 

Jesus said to him : The foxes have holes, and the birds 
of the air, nests, but the Son of man hath not where 
to lay His head. 

With what feeling did not Jesus Christ make this 
complaint ? but did He at all exaggerate in complain- 
ing thus ? Is it true that Jesus Christ was everywhere 
persecuted, everywhere ill-treated ? Alas ! the time of 



Digitized by Google 



248 



MEDITATIONS. 



His birth was anticipated by persecution : scarcely was 
He born, than He was obliged to fly, and seek an 
asylum amongst idolaters. He Himself complains of 
the bad treatment He received at Nazareth ; He was 
driven out from Jerusalem; He was refused an en- 
trance into the villages of Samaria ; He was several 
times obliged to make Himself invisible, to escape the 
fury of those, who wished to procure His death, before 
the time had come which He had chosen. But lastly, 
did this period of persecution and contempt, end with 
His mortal life ? Yes, it would have ended, if He had 
not instituted the most Blessed Sacrament. How so ? 
Because Jesus Christ, in this adorable mystery, is not 
safe from the insults and outrages of the impious. No 
one can doubt the fact. Savages, Canadians, and 
Idolaters might indeed doubt it, and never could 
believe it, if they did not know any Christians. But it 
is but too plain to Christians who are witnesses of 
the contempt shown to Jesus Christ in the Adorable 
Eucharist, even though they perhaps may have no 
feeling of grief at all on account of it. 

Meditation fob the Fourth Friday in August. 

At ipse nihil iUis respondebat ; sprevit autem ilium Herodes 
cum exercitu mo : et iUusit indutum veste alba, et remisit 
ad Pilatum. (St. Luke xxiii. 9 et 11.) 

But He answered him nothing. And Herod with his 
army set Him at nought, and mocked Him, putting 
on Him a white garment, and sent Him back to 
Pilate. 

How heroic is this patience, and how attractive this 
meekness ! how admirable and eloquent is this silence, 
and how many beautiful lessons, it teaches us ! But, 
my God, how great was the contempt with which He 
was treated on account of these great virtues, which 
were alone manifest proofs of His Divinity, and which 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 249 

should have gained Him the love and veneration of all ! 
Thy marvellous patience, oh my loving Saviour, and Thy 
admirable silence at the sight of all the outrages Thou 
sufferest in the Adorable Eucharist, have not an effect 
entirely similar ? If the smallest irreverence, if a single 
unworthy Communion, was at once severely punished, 
we should not be so immodest and so wicked. But this 
divine Saviour, Who has so rigorously punished even 
in this life, the least injuries done to His servants, 
Himself endures, without opening His mouth, the con- 
tempt shown to His Adorable Person in this mystery, 
and prefers to expose Himself, to the outrages of sinners 
by His great patience, rather than keep just souls away 
from His holy table, by inspiring them with fear. 
My God, what beautiful lessons does this silence of 
Jesus Christ, in the Adorable Eucharist, teach me ! 

SEPTEMBER. 

Meditation for the Second Friday in September. 

Jesus dixit : Nonne decern mundati sunt ? et novem ubi 
sunt? non est inventus qui rediret, et daret ghriam 
Deo, nisi hie alienigena. (St. Luke xvii. 17 et 18.) 

And Jesus answering, said : Were not ten made clean? 
and where are the nine ? There is no one found to 
return and give glory to God, but this stranger. 

In the world, we cannot endure ingratitude. It is only 
when God is in question that we do not concern our- 
selves about being ungrateful. This wonderful cure, 
this miracle, had been extended to ten persons, and of 
them all, one only was found who thanked his Bene- 
factor. Of all the benefits we have received from Jesus 
Christ, we cannot doubt that the Blessed Eucharist is 
one of the greatest : and even the greater part of the 
blessings we daily receive, are derived from the same 
source. But who thinks of often thanking Jesus 
Christ for this great benefit ? Who returns thanks to 



Digitized by Google 



250 



MEDITATIONS. 



this loving Saviour, who, in abolishing all the other 
sacrifices, has left us a Victim that cannot but be 
pleasing to God, an offering equal to all the other 
benefits we have received from Him, and to those 
that we may ask of Him ; a Host capable of cancelling 
all the sins of men ; a Host which is truly a sovereign 
remedy for all kinds of evil ; a tree of life that has 
power to communicate to us, not only health, but even 
immortality ? So sinful a forgetfulness, such enormous 
ingratitude, touched the Heart of a Man-God, and shall 
it not move mine, even when I myself am of the num- 
ber of these ungrateful wretches ? 

Meditation for the Third Friday in September. 

Et ut appropinquavit, videns Civitatem flevit super Mam 
dicens : Quia si cognovisses et tu, et quidem in hoc die 
tua, quce ad pacem tibi^nunc autem abscondita sunt ab 
octdis tuis. (St. Luke xix. 41 et 42.) 

And when He drew near, seeing the city, He wept 
over it, saying : If thou also hadst known, and that 
in this thy day, the things that are to thy peace ; 
but now they are hidden from thy eyes. 

How well do these tears of the Son of God, express the 
sentiments of His Heart ! Unhappy Jerusalem I Un- 
fortunate people, into what misfortunes does not thy 
blindness precipitate thee ! What wilt thou say, when 
thou shalt see that thy happiness was in thy own 
hands, and that it depended on thyself, to be the hap- 
piest of all nations, if thou wouldst have recognized on 
that day, the best of all Masters, and the meekest of 
Kings ? If Jesus Christ were still Gapable of grief and 
of shedding tears, loving us as He does, could He see 
us without weeping ? But can He at least, behold the 
indifference we feel for Him, in the Adorable Eucharist, 
the contempt we show Him, and the misfortunes that 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



251 



this indifference and this contempt draw down upon 
us, without saying to us, as He did to that unhappy 
people ; Ah slothful Christians ! ungrateful men ! If 
you would recognize at least, on this day which is given 
you, Him who is in the midst of you, Who alone can 
give you peace, and make you eternally happy ! But 
now all this is hidden from your eyes, you will not 
know Me. How would it ever be possible for you to 
be so unhappy, if you knew Me and loved Me ? 

Meditation fob the Foubth Friday in September, 

Ecce venit hora, etjam venit, ut dispergamini unusquisque 
in propria, et me solum relinquatis. (St. John xvi. 32.) 

Behold the hour cometh, and it is now come, that you 
shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall 
leave Me alone. 

What were the sentiments of the Heart of Jesus 
Christ, when preaching to His Apostles, regarding their 
baseness and ingratitude, their flight and their forget- 
fulness ! But could these Apostles persuade them- 
selves, that they would ever be capable of abandoning 
so good a Master ? Nevertheless, it has so happened. 
But my Saviour, this time is past : but how can I say 
this time is past ? The time came when Thou wert 
left alone : and wert Thou then left more alone, than 
Thou art at this time ? Jesus Christ is day and night 
on our Altars, and who is there, that is earnest and 
assiduous in visiting Him ? Was a palace of a prince 
ever without a crowd of courtiers, though the number 
is so small of those that are able to speak, to the 
prince ? Jesus Christ is the only one Who is always 
ready and Who receives all equally : the only one, Who 
has an excessive desire to do good to all, and Jesus 
Christ is almost always alone. 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



OCTOBER. 

Meditation for the Second Friday in October. 

Amen dico vobis, quia unus ex vobis tradet me, qui man- 
ducat mecum ; vce autem homini itti per quern FiUus 
hominis tradetur. (St. Mark xiv. 18 et 21.) 

Amen I say to you, one of you that eateth with me, 
shall betray me : but woe to that man, by whom the 
Son of man shall be betrayed. 

It is not surprising, that the Scribes and Pharisees, 
that impious and wicked men should have conspired 
against Jesus Christ, for they were His mortal enemies, 
and what else can be expected from an enemy ? But 
that Jesus Christ should see Himself betrayed by an 
Apostle, that is, by a man whom this Divine Saviour 
had chosen in preference to so many others, and to 
whom he had given such manifest proofs of the most 
ardent love ! But, my Saviour, since it is Thou, that 
choosest Thy servants and Thy favourites, how long 
wilt Thou find ungrateful men, even traitors, among 
those Thou hast chosen ? Out of so many Christians, 
whom Thou hast selected, by a pure effect of Thy love, 
in preference to so many infidels ; with whom Thou 
condescendest to dwell, on whom Thou so liberally 
bestowest Thy benefits, to whom Thou givest Thyself; 
how many are there who abuse Thy benefits ! how 
many ungrateful men, who refuse to communicate! 
how many traitors, even among those who communi- 
cate ! Shall I oh Lord, be always insensible to all 
this. 

Meditation for the Third Friday in October. 

Populus hie labiis me honorat : cor autem corum longe est 
a me; in vanum autem. me colunt. (St. Mark vii. 6 
et7.) 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



253 



This people honoureth me with their lips, but their 
heart is far from Me. And in vain do they worship 
Me. 

Truly, this honour, which was rendered in appearance 
to Jesus Christ, must have been most insincere ! the 
heart could indeed, have had little share, in the praises, 
that were bestowed on Him, from time to time, since all 
these homages terminated, by His being made to endure 
the greatest outrages, and finally, to expire on the 
cross ! To how many slothful Christians, may not Jesus 
Christ address the same fearful reproof at the present 
day ! That want of recollection in the Churches, that 
disrespect in presence of the Blessed Sacrament, that 
disgust for this divine food, all this clearly proves that 
our homage does not proceed from the heart. We 
have some appearance of devotion : but in this sort of 
devotion, there is much affectation : ah Lord ! can my 
heart be near Thine ; and not be wholly inflamed with 
Thy love ; can it love Thee so little ! 

Meditation for the Fourth Friday in October. 

Jerusalem, Jerusalem . . . Quoties volui congregare 
Jilio8 tuos, quemadmodum galUna congregat puUos suos 
sub alas, et noluisti. (St. Matt, xxiii. 37.) 

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem . . . how often would I 
have gathered together thy children, as the hen doth 
gather her chickens under her wings, and thou 
wouldest not ? 

What answer can this unhappy people make to this 
reproof? But what answer can we ourselves make, 
when it shall be addressed to us also? The figure 
which Jesus Christ here makes use of, shows our in- 
gratitude so much the more clearly, as it expresses 
more forcibly the love of Jesus Christ for us. This 



Digitized by Google 



254 



MEDITATIONS. 



loving Saviour bas placed Himself in the Blessed 
Sacrament, to enable us to find in Him at all times, 
a powerful protector, a physician, a Father. He is 
continually in the midst of us, because He wishes 
to have us constantly with Him. But do not the 
reluctance, and the forgetfulness of the greater number 
of Christians, oblige Him to say to us : My poor 
children, how often would I have gathered you, as 
a hen gathers her chickens, and you have gone away, 
and you have refused ! Do you wonder that you are so 
long afflicted, so often overcome, so often mortally 
wounded! For this reason, there are many among 
you that are sick and languishing, and many sleep the 
slumber of death. Shall I have any feeling in future, 
oh my loving Saviour, of the charitable reproof Thou 
givest me, or of the contempt I have hitherto had for 
it ? 

NOVEMBER. 

Meditation for the Second Friday in November. 

Procidit in faciem suam orans, et dicens : Pater mi, *i 
' possibile est, transeat a me calix iste ; veruntamen non 
sicut ego volo, sed sicut tu* (St. Matt. xxvi. 39.) 

He fell upon His face praying and saying; My 
Father, if it be possible, let this chalice pass from 
me. Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt. 

Jesus Christ had always passionately desired to give 
His Blood, for the salvation of men, and had a hundred 
times testified this desire. It is not then death, which 
terrifies Him, and makes this chalice so bitter, but the 
ingratitude of those very men, who will not profit by 
His death. I have desired, Eternal Father, and more 
than ever I desire, to give liberty to slaves, but I have 
never desired to make ungrateful men. The outrages 
I am about to endure from my enemies, do not alarm 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



255 



Me, but the contempt, that I foresee my own children 
will show Me, afflicts Me, the blindness of the first 
moves Me, but the enormous ingratitude of these last, 
pierces My Heart with grief. Jesus Christ passionately 
desired, that the time were arrived, for instituting the 
most Blessed Sacrament of the Altar ; but were not 
the abuse and the contempt of this august Sacrament, 
which He foresaw, a great cause of sadness to Him ? 
and had He not reason to say, that if it were possible 
He desired this chalice might pass from Him? In 
very truth, this chalice must be very bitter, but do we 
not know, that it depends on us, to remove this chalice 
from Him, for it is we ourselves, who by our contempt 
and unworthiness, constitute all its bitterness, we who 
offer it to Him ? How is this Oh Lord ! It is in my 
power to sweeten this chalice by my homage, and shall 
I not do it ? 

Meditation for the Third Friday in November. 

Conversus autem ad Ulas Jesus dixit : Film Jerusalem, 
nolite flere super me, sed super vos ipsas flete, et super 
filios vestros. (St. Luke xxiii. 28.) 

But Jesus, turning to them said : Daughters *>f Jeru- 
salem, weep not over Me, but weep for yourselves, 
and for your children. 

Was love ever witnessed equal to that which Jesus 
Christ shows us on this occasion ? His body is all 
lacerated with scourges, He has scarcely a few drops of 
blood remaining; He is become the laughing stock and 
the butt of a whole nation, and in this pitiable state, 
He is not at all touched by what He Himself suffers, 
He feels nothing, but what we are about to draw down 
Upon ourselves, by our want of gratitude. Alas ! if 
we have a heart capable of feeling, what can move it, 
if this cannot ? Jesus Christ forgotten, despised, out* 



Digitized by Google 



256 



MEDITATIONS* 



raged in the adorable Eucharist, feels, so to speak, 
more deeply the misfortunes we draw upon ourselves by 
this contempt, than the contempt itself. Weep, He 
says to us, weep, my children, over your forgetfulness 
of your Eedeemer, of your Father. Weep over that 
enormous ingratitude, that you have carried to the 
highest pitch ; over those irreverences, that you have 
committed so boldly, in My presence. Weep for so 
many saerilegious Communions, weep for the great 
loss you have suffered, by refusing to acknowledge Me ; 
or by knowing Me, and refusing to love Me. In what, 
oh my beloved Saviour, can my tears be employed, if I 
can think of my ingratitude without weeping ? 

Meditation for the Fourth Friday in November. 

Begina Austri mrget in judicio cum generatione ista, et 
condemnabit earn ; quia venit a Jinibus terra 'audire 
sapientiam Salomonis ; et ecce, plus quam Salomon hie 
(St. Matt. xii. 42.) 

The queen of the south shall rise in judgment with 
this generation and shall condemn it : because she 
came from the ends of the earth, to hear the wisdom 
of Solomon, and behold a greater than Solomon here. 

There have been newly converted Christians, in the 
Indies and in Japan, who have travelled more than a 
hundred leagues every year, to have the consolation, of 
once adoring Jesus Christ, in the most Blessed Sacra- 
ment, of hearing one single Mass ; and they thought 
nothing of the fatigue, of so difficult a journey, that 
they might have the happiness, of spending half an 
hour with Jesus Christ. My God! how many will 
rise up at the day of judgment, and will condemn us ! 
We have Jesus Christ in our town ; religious persons 
have Jesus Christ in their own house ; and this benefit 
is esteemed as nothing ! and some value it so little, 



Digitized by GoOglc 



MEDITATIONS. 



257 



that they only visit Jesus Christ with indifference, 
many even with repugnance, and almost all,J Without 
devotion. Will not the Queen of the South rise up on 
the day of judgment against this people ? and will she 
not suffice to condemn them, because she came from 
the extremity of the earth, to hear the wisdom of Solo- 
mon? and yet, He who is here upon our Altars, 
is greater than Solomon. 

DECEMBER. 

Meditation for the Second Friday in December. 

Hoc est autem judicium ; quia lux venit in mundum, 
et dilexerunt homines magis tenebras quam lucem. 
(St. John iii. 19.) 

And this is the judgment : because the light is come 
into the world, and men loved darkness rather than 
the light. 

How deplorable is the blindness of the Jews ! and 
what will these unfortunate men be able to say, when 
they shall be reproached, for the misfortunes they have 
drawn upon themselves, by their blindness ? You had 
the light in the midst of you, will it be said to them, 
and you have shut your eyes, because you pre- 
ferred darkness. The Sun of justice so long expected, 
had risen amongst you, and you would not profit by 
the brilliant light which would have made you happy. 
This same light is still with us in the Blessed Sacra- 
ment, but are all Christians wiser than the Jews ? do 
all Christians profit by this light ? and is there no 
reason to fear, that the presence of Jesus Christ in the 
Blessed Sacrament, His Heart open to all men, His 
Heart always ready to pour out upon us all the 
treasures of grace It encloses, and of which It is the 
source, may be the cause of our condemnation ? Do 
we have recourse to Jesus Christ in the Blessed Sacra- 

s 



Digitized by Google 



258 



MEDITATIONS. 



ment ? Do we go to Him with confidence ? Do we 
expect from Him, the lights and helps that are neces- 
sary for us, in the various circumstances of life ? Alas ! 
we despise this light, because we love the darkness, 
and this contempt will be, without doubt, the cause of 
our condemnation. 

Meditation for the Third Friday in Drcembeb. 

JRespondit eis Joannes dicens: Medius autem vestrum 
stetit, quern vos nescitis . . . cujus ego non sum dignus, 
ut solvam ejus corrigiam calceamenti. (St. John i. 26 

. etM.) 

John answered them saying . . . but there hath stood 
one in the midst of you, whom you know not ... 
the latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy to loose. 

What a misfortune for the Jews not to have known 
Him who was in the midst of them ! But do we 
know Him who is amongst us ? Great ones of the 
world, do you know Him ? You, who punish so 
rigorously, the least omissions of the respect due to 
you, and who are so little touched by the outrages 
offered to that Monarch, whom you profess to acknow- 
ledge ? People, do you know Him who is in the 
midst of you, you, who are so assiduous in attending 
upon those, from whom you hope for some favour, and 
so circumspect in the presence of those you fear, while 
you show no respect in the Church, and never find a 
moment of time, to come and pay your homage, to 
Jesus Christ, in the Blessed Sacrament? Lastly, 
ministers of our Lord, religious persons, do you know 
Him who is continually in the midst of you ? For, 
if you do know Him, whence comes it that you are 
so seldom near Him ? No Lord, we do not know 
Thee ; I confess tlfat hitherto I have not known Thee ; 
but my devotion towards Thee shall show in future, 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



259 



that I begin really and truly to know Thee, because I 
will begin really to love Thee. 

Meditation for the Fourth Friday in December. 

Factum est autem cum merit tin, impleti sunt dies ut 
pareret, et peperit FUium suum primogenitum, et 
reclinavit eum in prasepio ; quia non erat ei locus in 
diversorio. (Luc. ii. 6 et 7.) 

And it came to pass, that when they were there, her 
days were accomplished that she should be delivered. 
And she brought forth her first-born Son, and laid 
Him in a manger, because there was no room for 
them in the inn. 

There is room for all, and none for Jesus Christ ! This 
divine Saviour begins, even before His birth, to be re- 
jected and despised. A Man- God is reduced to be bom 
in a stable, whilst mere men are born in palaces. What 
were then the sentiments of Jesus Christ, on seeing 
Himself so wretchedly lodged, and what must they bo 
at the present day, seeing Himself ill-received, when 
Christians dwell in magnificent houses ? Do all the 
sacred vessels, in which Jesus Christ is continually 
enclosed, do all the holy places where He dwells, corre- 
spond with that sumptuous magnificence, that we wit- 
ness, in the apartments and furniture, of persons in the 
world ? Oh that, at least, this loving Saviour did not 
often find Himself received in impure souls, and hearts 
stained with a thousand sins ! I know, my loving Saviour, 
that Thy delights are to be with a pure heart ; purify 
mine then, that Thou mayest find Thy delight in it. 
Grant that in future, I may have the happiness of re- 
ceiving Thee less unworthily. Inflame this heart with 
Thy pure love ; may Thy Sacred Heart come and take 
the place of mine ; may mine in future be so intimately 
united to Thine, that it may have no other sentiments. 
Amen. 

s 2 



Digitized by Google 



260 



EJACULATIONS. 



EJACULATIONS. 

Good Jesus, too late have I known Thee, too late have 
I loved Thee ! I will love Thee, because Thou hast 
loved me first. Grant me a heart that may think of 
Thee, a soul that may love Thee. 

I will know Thee Lord, Who knowest me, I wiU 
know Thee, the strength of my soul : show Thyself to 
me, oh my comforter. 

Grant that my heart may desire Thee ; desiring Thee, 
may seek Thee ; seeking Thee, may find Thee ; and 
finding Thee, may love Thee. 

O love, which burnest always, and art never extin- 
guished, inflame me wholly with thy fire, with thy love, 
with thy sweetness ! 

O my joy, draw my heart to Thee ! Sweet food of my 
soul, may I feed upon Thee ! 

Thou hast loved me, Lord, more than Thyself, for 
Thou hast been willing to die for me; that Thou 
mightest redeem a servant, Thou hast delivered up 
Thyself. 

Grant to my heart repentance; to my spirit con- 
trition ; to my eyes a fountain of tears. 

Extinguish in me the desires of the flesh, and in. 
flame me with the fire of Thy love. 

Look down, oh holy Father, on the torments of the 
[Redeemer, and forgive the sins of the redeemed. 

0 Lord Jesus ! I am the wound of Thy torments, 
and the cause of Thy death ; I am the bruises of Thy 
passion, I am the burden of Thy anguish. 

1 entreat of Thee, oh my hope, through all Thy 
mercies, to forgive all my iniquities. 

I could offend Thee, oh holy Father, of myself, but 
I could not appease Thee ; behold in Thy Son what 
will cause Thee to show mercy to Thy servant. 



Digitized by Google 



EJACULATIONS. 



261 



He is a Priest and sacrifice for us to Thee ; and He 
is a sacrifice, because He is a Priest. 

I should despair, on account of my exceeding great 
sins, unless Thy Word, oh my God, had been made 
Flesh, and had dwelt amongst us. 

O charity ! oh mercy ! oh my Redeemer and my 
hope ! in Thee I breathe, to Thee I sigh. 

I, whom Thou lovest, am not worthy, but certainly 
Thou, Whom I wish to love, art not unworthy. 

Hope of my heart, if I have not as yet deserved to 
love Thee as much as I ought, at least I desire to love 
Theto as much as I ought. 

Grant that I may see Thee, the joy of my heart ; 
grant that I may love Thee, the life of my soul. 

Be in my mind, be in my heart, because I languish 
with love, because without Thee I die ; it is better for 
me not to exist, than to be without Jesus. 

0 Lord Jesus, light of the hearts of those who see 
Thee, and life of the souls of those . who love Thee, 
come into my heart, I beseech Thee ! 

Come into my soul, that Thou mayest possess it, 
and that I may place Thee as a seal upon my heart. 

Be with me, Thou, Whom I seek, Whom I love, 
Whom, with my heart and mouth, as well as I am able, 
I praise and adore. 



Digitized by Google 



262 



^EJACULATIONS. 



EJACULATIONS. 

Oh my God, my'jesus, whom shall I love, if I love not 
Thee, my sovereign Good ? 

Place me within Thy wounds, unite me to Thy Heart, 
that I may never more separate myself from Thee. 

Oh most merciful Jesus ! I weep for the time when 
I did not know Thee, I weep for the sins hy which I 
have offended Thee. Ah, how many years have I lost, 
in which I might have loved Thee ! 

I weep for my sins, and I will always weep for the 
outrages that are committed against Thy love, and 
against Thy most sweet Heart. 

Accept, oh holy Father and my God, the most sweet 
sentiments of the Heart of Thy Messed Jesus : I offer 
them to Thee in satisfaction for my sins, and those of 
the whole world. 

Oh my Beloved, my Lord, why do men forget Thee ! 
why do they not love Thee, Who didst die to love us ! 

What can I give Thee to repay some little of the 
great debt I owe Thee ? 

I offer my heart to Thy love, Thy love to Thyself. 

My adorable Saviour and my God, I hope in Thee, 
in Thee I will live and die. 

O Heart wounded through love of me, wound mine 
with Thy holy love. 

O may my heart burn with Thy most sweet love, and 
melt with contrition for having so much offended Thee. 

May I live in grief and contrition, to die loving Thee, 
in Thee, and with Thee. 

When, my Jesus, shall I see Thee, to love Thee 
always. 

When shall I cling to Thy adorable feet, embrace 
Thy sacred side, and wholly unite myself to Thy most 
loving Heart ? 



Digitized by Google 



EJACULATIONS. 



263 



0 my Saviour, my mercy, show now what Thou 
canst do in me ; help me in my sorrows, in my 
afflictions, in my fears. 

In Thy mercy watch over me in life, defend me in 
dangers, save me at my last hour. 

1 consecrate to Thee my life for ever, to Thee every 
breath I draw, to Thee all the motions of my poor 
heart. 

I offer and unite, to Thy life and passion, every action, 
every good work I do ; help me to do much that I may 
love Thee more. 

Glory be to Thee, oh my God, as it was, as it is, and 
as it ever shall be, world without end. 



FINIS. 



Digitized by Google 



264 



INDEX. 

PAGE 

The Authors Preface i 

Notice viii 

MOTIVES OF THE DEVOTION TO THE SACRED 
HEART OP OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST. 

FIRST PART. 

Chapter I.— What is meant by Devotion to the Sacred 
Heart of oar Lord J esus Christ and in what it consists . . 1 

Chapter II. — The means employed by Almighty God to 
inspire this devotion 6 

Chapter III. — How just and reasonable is the devotion to 
the Sacred Heart of our Lord Jesus Christ 10 

I. — The excellence of the Adorable Heart of our Lord 
Jesus Christ 11 

II. — The amiable qualities which are found in the 
person of Jesus Christ 13 

III. — The sensible proofs of the immense love that Jesus 
Christ has for us 16 

IV. — The extreme ingratitude of men towards Jesus 
Christ 21 

Chapter IV. — How useful the devotion is for our salvation 
and for our perfection 25 

V. — How much true sweetness there is in the devo- 
tion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 30 

VI. — Of the devotion that the Saints have had to the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ 34 

SECOND PART. 

Chapter I. — The dispositions requisite for a tender devo- 
tion to the Sacred Heart of our Lord Jesus Christ 42 

I. — First Disposition. — A great horror of Sin ib. 

II. — Second Disposition. — A lively Faith 43 



Digitized by Google 



INDEX. 265 
PAGE 

III. — Third Disposition. — A great desire of having an 
ardent love of Jesus Christ 45 

I V. — Fourth Disposition. — Interior Recollection .... 47 

Chapter II. — What are the obstacles which prevent us 
from gathering all the fruit we ought from the devotion 
to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ 56 

I. — First obstacle.— Tepidity 58 

II. — Second Obstacle.— Self-love 65 

III. — Third Obstacle.— A secret Pride 69 

IV. — Fourth Obstacle.— Some unmortified Passion . . 73 

Chapter III. — The means of overcoming the obstacles that 
hinder us from gathering the fruit we ought from the 
devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ 76 

I. — First Means. — True mortification 77 

II. — Second Means.— Sincere Humility 81 

III. — The joy and true sweetness that are inseparable 
from the exercise of true mortification and of sincere 
humility. 83 

Chapter IV. — The particular means of acquiring the per- 
fect love of Jesus Christ and this tender devotion to 
His Sacred Heart 89 

I. — First Means.— Prayer ib. 

II. — Second Means. — Frequent Communion 92 

III. — Third Means.— Visits to the Blessed Sacrament 98 

IV. — Fourth Means.— Fidelity in accomplishing with 
exactness some practices of this devotion 99 

V. — Fifth Means.— A tender devotion towards the 
Blessed Virgin 101 

VI. — Sixth Means.— A special devotion to St Aloysius 
Gonzaga 106 

VII. — A Day of Retreat every month 110 

THIRD PART. 

Chapter I. — What are the motives and sentiments with 
which we should practise this devotion 112 

Chapter II. — Visits to the Blessed Sacrament 119 

I. — The motives that should induce us to visit the 
Blessed Sacrament , ib. 



Digitized by Google 



266 INDEX. 

PAGE 

IT. — Method of Visiting the Blessed Sacrament 124 

III. — Practice for spending every day, a quarter or 
half an hour, in prayer before the Blessed Sacrament, 
suited to all sorts of persons 131 

I V. — A few words of advice on frequent Visits to the 
Blessed Sacrament 135 

Chapter III.— Practice for celebrating and hearing Mass . 138 

I. — -Reflection on the Sacrifice of the Mass • ib. 

II. — Practice for the celebration of the Sacrifice of the 
Mass 142 

III. — Practice for assisting at the Sacrifice of the 
Mass 147 

Chapter IV— Practical Reflections on Communion ...... 151 

Chapter V.— What are the marks of the perfect love of 
Jesus Christ and of true devotion to His Sacred 
Heart... 159 

I.— Character of one who has a true love of Jesus 

Christ 160 

IL— . Effects of the perfect love of Jesus Christ 167 

Chapter VI. — Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus for the day of the Feast 174 

Chapter VIL— Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus for every month, for every week, for every day, 
and for certain hours of each day 180 

I. — Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
for the first Friday in each month ib. 

IL — Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
for every week 183 

III. — Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus for every day 184 

Chapter VIII.— The Exercises of this Devotion 188 

Preparation of honour to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
Christ 189 

Act of Consecration to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
Christ 191 

Offering to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ 193 

Act of Love to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ .... 195 

Act of adoration of the Sacred Heart of J esus Christ . . 196 



Digitized by Google 



INDEX. , 267 
PAGE 

Offering, that may be made at the time of Mass .... 196 

Act of Contrition 197 

Prayer, that St. Gertrude used to recite every day, in 
honour of the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ 198 

Act of love ib. 

MEDITATIONS FOR THE FEAST OF THE 
SACKED HEART OF JESUS, 
For every Friday in each month, and for certain days 
of the year, more especially consecrated to the honour 
of the Sacred Heart of our Lord Jesus Christ 199 

For the first Friday after the Octave of Corpus 
Christi, on the incomprehensible love shown us by 
Jesus Christ, in the most Blessed Sacrament of the 
Altar ib. 

1st Point— The ardent desire Jesus Christ feels to 
be with us • 201 

2nd Point.— The excessive desire of Jesus Christ to 
make us partakers of His blessings 205 

3rd Point—The excessive desire of Jesus Christ to 
be united with us . . . 210 

Meditation for the first Friday in each month, on the 
sentiments of the Heart of Jesus Christ at the sight of 
the ingratitude of men, and of the outrages, to which 
His excessive love for these very men, has exposed 
Him 217 

1st Point— The sentiments of the Heart of Jesus 
Christ at the sight of the torments He would have to 
endure from the cruelty of the Jews ib. 

2nd Point.— The sentiments of the Heart of Jesus 
Christ at the sight of the outrages He would endure 
from the malice of Heretics 220 

3rd Point.— The sentiments of the Heart of Jesus 
Christ at the sight of the ingratitude of the greater 
number of the Faithful 222 

Subjects of Meditation for every Friday in the year • . 226 

January. — Meditation for the 2nd Friday 227 

1st Point ib. 

2nd Point 228 

For the 3rd Friday 229 

For the 4th Friday 230 



Digitized by Google 



263 . , INDEX. 

PAGE 

February.— For the 2nd Friday 231 

For the 3rd Friday 232 

For the 4th Friday _. 233 

March.— For the 2nd Friday 234 

For the 3rd Friday 235 

For the 4th Friday 236 

April.— For the 2nd Friday ib. 

For the 3rd Friday 237 

For the 4th Friday 239 

May.— For the 2nd Friday ib. 

For the 3rd Friday 240 

For the 4th Friday 241 

June.— For the 2nd Friday 242 

For the 3rd Friday . ib. 

For the 4th Friday 243 

July.— For the 2nd Friday . f 244 

For the 3rd Friday .• 246 

For the 4th Friday 246 

August— For the 2nd Friday ib. 

For the 3rd Friday 247 

For the 4th Friday 248 

September.— For the 2nd Friday 249 4 

For the 3rd Friday 250 ' " 

For the 4th Friday 261 

October.— For the 2nd Friday 252 " 

For the 3rd Friday . . . ib. 

For the 4th Friday 253 

November.— For the 2nd Friday 254 

For the 3rd Friday 255 

For the 4th Friday 256 

December.— For the 2nd Friday 257 

For the 3rd Friday 258 

For the 4th Friday 259 

Ejaculations 260 

4 JF63 



Digitized by Google 



y Google 



y Google 



y Google 



