OUR LADY OF fAtIMA
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFnObYXLEWGTpB9byZeEMdYmQUYg9YKbPZq14MX4ukiVGTafmDXRyCrSHcKyjKezMW6AxHYXmMrF25HtwPSW-_46KEjUmmTMQV0CwmyEYFSduSuL33j5XQTQ_NBNColvt07ljddww=w491-h810-v0
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY KIW YORK • BOSTON • CHICAGO • DALLAS
ATLANTA • SAN FRANCISCO
MACMILLAN AND CO., Limited
LONDON . BOMBAY • CALCUTTA • HABEAS MELBOURNE
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY OF CANADA, Limited
TORONTO
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGoNGCozLIVvkpCdSVdLrwmNImY_QHN5BtrpBvqWVujEThzRMuthqwm7ez2rvojMh3y3UEs_RjCiqgTv3nND8CLjxOYfg9t2iNjZdugYV0UoCOZ2XQZspxnNk9UZen0EskaHsvk=w491-h810-v0
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE6Xxud2Mp1Ql4zVI7TvNrk9SO69eMkKTTLdgVes4-LwvpRW6kHLlUKtxQOEgcIN3K8z5UibumDhD4PyMz2ap_MEWFYQXEvLW1PXoE7kRwMDoFtytfklmLcoTUwK_0lcl0jjRpa_g=w491-h810-v0
OUR LADY OF FATIMA
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHpQWDM6gZe8jFs2XoYmYVpMx-L1ak0kPFRx-27bkHYfkch00VWfZE74pChho1IrlJaeuREnNQXxccrVF8HMdjtzhyhcN37baTpqGA8nXwm34IKlIojjM_Xv9FB6xZsUxD3ErUOMA=w491-h810-v0
OUR LADY OF FATIMA
By
WILLIAM THOMAS WALSH
THE CATHOLIC BOOK CLUB EDITION
New York
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
*947
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEBakmaxF7-Gq4x2tsSkUu9K4L-7VhJSFs8xPG7-nK4sgdQNSL2hMk9E1zO5JIV6Xl9RMi293dT1Pce8LIMK50H6eBr-FM2p-lvZ216sUsNMU6k4cYQOtGMF7-oxa9IWzj9yWfB5Q=w491-h810-v0
Copyright, 1947, by WILLIAM THOMAS, WALSH.
All rights reserved—no part of this . book
may be reproduced in any form without
permission in writing from the publisher,
except by a reviewer who wishes to quote brief
passages in connection with a review written
for inclusion in magazine or newspaper.
First Printing.
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHFS2jTHSip0DbbsAGlrRKyWjnnVP7p65TzLUJ4VHlZ-6O_WSbZQdWWHe1jAOqf3CDqDfsRMEsmIG1fBs8hBk-2Q47rPptfm7lozT6JWpJqcZeRLU66Ap9Gnydo0e4t2fnWhvog1A=w491-h810-v0
PREFACE
One of the strangest and most beautiful stories I have ever
heard was enacted from 1516 to 1920 in the hill country called
the Serra da Aire, in the geographical center of Portugal. Three
shepherd children, the oldest ten, the youngest seven, reported
six times in 1917 that they had seen a Lady made wholly of light,
who stood on a small tree, spoke to them, and vanished. On the
last occasion, in the presence of 70,000 people, she performed a
startling miracle to prove the truth of what the children said. Two
of the little shepherds died in childhood, as she had foretold.
Time has verified her other prophecies thus far: the Bolshevik
Revolution, which began soon after; the horrors of World War II;
the menace that Marxism offers to the entire world at this moment.
The Lady said that if her wishes were obeyed, she would convert
Russia and there would be peace. If not, every country in the
world would be scourged and enslaved.
The third shepherd is still living. She is Sister Maria das Dores
(Mary of the Sorrows), a lay sister of the Institute of Saint
Dorothy, just forty years of age. I had a long conversation with
her last summer. This book is based principally upon her four
written but unpublished memoirs, in the light of that conversation.
The message she has lived to reveal is that of no ordinary Lady.
It comes, I am convinced, from the Queen of heaven and earth,
whose beauty, power and goodness have been the theme of
prophets and saints for thousands of years. She is that maiden of
whom Isaias wrote, “A virgin shall conceive and bear a son ...”
the one of whom King Solomon asked, “Who is she that cometh
forth as the morning rising, fair as the moon, bright as the sun,
terrible as an army set in array?” It was to her that the angel
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHO4OsaoPTSwGT39B6ipuqTEREgSufdnZpToly0EoupP1miL6QIunjmsZJVCczNttOp_-EVz9QpKSdfzjcRxjWjFDn2iqMI30uqXeaGKEgWINhJ7qeg74uXD-pRSMwwHgeEbIZQXA=w491-h810-v0
Gabriel said, “Hail, full of grace! The Lord is with thee. Blessed
art thou among women!” and she replied “Henceforth all genera¬
tions shall call me blessed.”
This Lady has often changed the course of history. Her Rosary,
preached by Saint Dominic, overthrew the Manichean heresy
that would have destroyed European society. It kept both faith
and the love of freedom alive in Eire for centuries. It won the
battle of Lepanto, where Christendom was saved from Moslem
domination. It was under her special protection that Columbus
set out to discover our western world, changing the name of his
flagship from Mariagalante to Santa Maria; and every night, as
dusk came over the uncharted and terrifying waste of the Sargasso
Sea, his sailors would assemble on the decks to sing her vesper
hymn:
“Hail, holy Queen, mother of mercy,
Our life, our sweetness and our hope,
Hail! . . .”
American Catholics followed this tradition in placing their country
under the protection of her Immaculate Conception. And let no
one imagine that any sort of Brave New World will be able to
efface her memory! For at the end of time, before the consumma¬
tion of this world, there will appear in heaven—or has it already
appeared?—the sign foretold by Saint John in his Apocalypse:
“A woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet,
and on her head a crown of twelve stars.”
No one who believes in God and the immortality of the soul
should find it incredible that the Mother of Christ, the incarnate
God, should have revealed herself to privileged persons at various
crises in human affairs. Several of these appearances have been
established beyond any reasonable doubt—notably, in modern
times, the apparitions to Saint Bernadette at Lourdes. But why
should she have appeared in Portugal in 1917, and in such a de¬
serted and inaccessible place as the Serra da Aire? It takes all day
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHLLHoY3kdQjfW_psmBeYekGL7vWKCQa_3x9nMXfqhmTP-ph2fIERt2m1FB7l5UZW65Jx1BzJHUI6uLIW82i9e0U2ucMMwotqAMsbCzdeYVhthf-zNCdeLMB4XYe1bF02ATPW8H=w491-h810-v0
to get to Fatima, some ninety miles north of Lisboa, first by train
and then by bus or taxi; and when one arrives, there is not much
to see but a vast moor with sparse vegetation for lean sheep to
nibble, and a few wretched villages (by American standards)
where humble peasants scrape a bare existence out of a dry reddish
soil.
Well, first of all she appears where it pleases God, and her.
But the Portuguese have an idea that they were favored partly,
at least, because their country has always been called a terra de
Santa Maria; and in the Serra about Fatima, regardless of revolu¬
tions and apostacies in other places, the poor have clung for cen¬
turies with unwavering devotion to the recitation of her Rosary.
Cova da Ina, the wild place where the apparitions occurred, some
two miles west of Fatima, was named from the girl martyr Saint
Iria or Irene, who probably had a hermitage there. And eight miles
west of Cova da Ina is a tiny antique chapel, square and ugly,
where King Joao I promised Our Lady that if she gave him vic¬
tory over the Spanish invaders in 1385, he would raise a more
fitting temple in her honor. He kept his promise by building,
across the road, one of the most beautiful Gothic churches in the
world, the incredibly graceful and majestic abbey of Batalha.
The Constable of Portugal, who commanded the army under
King Joao, was Nuno Alvares Pereira, a hero of twenty-five who
wielded a sw’ord engraved with the name “Maria.” He built six
churches in honor of Our Lady, one of the loveliest of them the
Carmelite monastery and chapel at Lisboa. It was there, after
forty years in the king’s service, that he retired to lay his sword
at the feet of her image, and to take the habit of her order, with the
name Nuno de Santa Maria. Nearly five hundred years later he
was beatified by Pope Benedict XV. His sword “Maria” may
still be seen at the Carmo at Lisboa, in the hand of a statue of the
Prophet Elias.
It was among the mountains hallowed by so many memories
and traditions of her that the Lady appeared. And when such
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE_F5vKfFGXssZE3Edye0H7WaBlnczbQpVKI0tPhfmeKjZJBKYrvA7rYzh-Oj3ulQCFATDVC_ViBlMObhZQZKiKDrTNLY1XuTHTJ1-pKELqAhpfjaVhU4qFbxGDRhPfzGg7ejReDw=w491-h810-v0
a Lady appears anywhere, to give mankind a request and a warning,
it is no small matter. My interest in the subject was aroused
by what I heard of it from the Reverend Father John C. Rubba,
O. P., and the Reverend Father William A. Hinnebusch, O. P.
of Providence College. Some of the published accounts,
however, were so conflicting that I decided to go to Portugal and
try to verify the details before attempting a book. Thanks mainly
to their good offices, and to the prayers of several communities of
Dominican and Discalced Carmelite contemplatives, I was able
to do so under the most favorable conditions. His Excellency, the
Most Reverend Jose Alvernaz, Bishop of Cochin, India, and His
Eminence, the Most Reverend Francis Cardinal Spellman of New
York were good enough to commend my trip to authorities in
Portugal, and I was given every facility for investigation by His
Eminence, the Most Reverend Manuel Cardinal Cerejeira, Patri¬
arch of Lisboa, and His Excellency, the Most Reverend Dom
Jose Alves Correia da Silva, Bishop of Leiria, in whose diocese
Fatima and Cova da Ina lie. I flew to Lisboa, attended the pil¬
grimage and processions of July 12—13, 1946, and lived for some
time at Cova de Iria and nearby places, interviewing the parents
and relatives of the two dead children, besides other witnesses of
the miracle of October 1917.
I am indebted to the works and spoken advice of the Reverend
Father Jose Galamba de Oliveira, author of Jacinta: episodios
ineditos das a pari foes de Nossa Senhora; the Reverend Father Luis
Gonzaga Aires da Fonseca, S. J., professor at the Pontifical Biblical
Institute at Rome and author of Le Meraviglie di Fatima, and the
Reverend Father Joao de Marchi, I. M. C., author of Era uma
senhora mais brilhante que o sol. This fast is particularly valuable
because Father De Marchi has spent three years at Fatima
interrogating the chief surviving witnesses, and setting down their
exact words with scholarly patience and accuracy. I have taken some
of the particulars about Sister Dores’ early convent life from Senhor
Antero de Figueiredo’s Fatima: Graf as, Segredos, Misterios.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHGY9S5N3jmIVeOq2mo_if8gEs63rtaGFMRjAOFVBkxhST5w0resh4K_S9MFQPp7Puhl3tUjUJtxAvZjc8F9ih_v1hIY8yZwZ6ydIntO6gzdHBxjYjS2VNYvD8gngg-wi8eNkShUQ=w491-h810-v0
I can never sufficiently thank the Reverend Father Manuel
Rocha, who was asked to help me by His Eminence, the Cardinal
Patriarch, and whose patience and courtesy were inexhaustible;
and my good fellow-pilgrims from America, the Reverend Father
Leal Furtado and Mr. Daniel F. Sullivan. Finally, the assistance
of my daughter Helen has been indispensable.
The book is not “fictionized.” I owe the conversations chiefly to
the precise memory of Sister Dores.
The interest of the story in itself—and it would be a great one
even if it had been invented, instead of happening—is negligible
compared to the truth that it was intended by its divine Author to
convey. I came home from Portugal convinced that nothing is so
important as making known what the Mother of God asked in
those apparitions of 1917, which for some reason have been so
neglected, so distorted, so misunderstood. The future of our civili¬
zation, our liberties, our very existence may depend upon the
acceptance of her commands.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFknuu4CivT48rWdbrUA62jb_LaI4z85XnO_xHU5s6f5O9rt3XAppyW-fECD9dIdyYUE8vwBOlmnsu_3cKfSey416WJmaBrn6colpS5VNyv2cqpCK3FHhF0H4_01lJFCufFkvmu=w491-h810-v0
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG2Ju9Kvivu7K9boweROwEPbShoviR-NstEH_WIxSEtiqQIWuMRTOuL1LLiGi0W2bpNXzHgaiG9O_mKCnDoKBo62QGMgd6ntpeMwyo_8CSXQE_tb7qh05xiiI4KL9HOsf8IE5t1dw=w491-h810-v0
X ■
OUR LADY OF FATIMA
\
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGs1nFMrh6nYYau0MqzHoCnx3NXG3f0XEGdGPpsYpKOXdtnGGOPIIgqdhZCRNjkogee-OdW7lAi6Mp4kJxBAyn2eNqKcmwNNf4BQo2N6cRbOsXHJu7UlobrsoOS_72I_zN_PnmDOw=w491-h810-v0
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE3gHA6Xw8hIyodoy6ApI1ayDlyeBpOlqNyQl6EeAZXTY_ascZJOxaDldx1ZqyRupEoOgZMkzXwRzA39II1KajeP4gzLLakqX4fcS60lb0-TgrmoixruYlI9OpRR-S0jJeQCJhdEA=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER I
Half a mile south of Fatima, on both sides of a winding road
paved with flattish cobblestones and scarcely wide enough for two
ox-teams to pass, lies the village of Aljustrel. The houses, sheds
and patios all join a high stone wall that runs along each side of
that narrow “street,” and seem to be strung on it like beads of
odd shapes and sizes. Windows are few and small, for the north¬
west blast of winter, cutping across the mountains from the Atlantic,
is as pitiless as the parching sunlight of summer; hence these squat
one-story dwellings with their red tile roofs and whitewashed stone
walls have a veiled and wary look, as if each one could tell an
enormous secret if it chose.
If it is a week-day, the men are in the fields; but in and out
of the dark interiors pass short, rather handsome women and
children with fine eyes, gleaming teeth, and—this from carrying
heavy burdens on their heads—straight postures and graceful
movements, even under the weight of three or four gallons of
water in an earthen jug. Their bare feet, dusty but shapely, seem
not to feel the sharp stones, nor are their laughing faces annoyed
by the flies, fleas and other insects that buzz, in hot weather, over
the patios and the sheds where animals are kept. A burro brays,
a dog barks, a rooster crows, a yoke of oxen lumber heavily along
the road. The air is seasoned with many odors, among which can
be distinguished those of pines and evergreen shrubs, wild mint
and onions, sheep, goats and chickens; above all, the distinctive
musty and acrid though not exactly disagreeable smell that the
soil of Portugal seems to have everywhere. There is nothing here
of the overpowering fishiness of Lisboa or Porto, but the red fields
are just as insistent in their own way, and the clothes of all these
people are laden with the aroma. Such is Aljustrel, where Lucia
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFCoU5bK_mNsjBxPAct7TSn5hBINQOfuwF3n3J3VmVsDw5AasFL5YVHnKgztmLNZ9-M-3JhB1wbx3KepX_iu8fTZ5e3IlXLk1QvwnYKoittwwiWmFfO1RHgLa9JbPvtfz2yJs2FiQ=w491-h810-v0
Abobora, now the famous Sister Maria of the Sorrows, was born
on March 22, 1907.
The cottage in which she grew up was very much like the one
where visitors now find that patient and courteous woman with
dark honest eyes who is her oldest sister, Maria of the Angels. ,
The living room is severely furnished with a table, a chair, a
couple of old wooden chests where food and clothing are stored,
a few pious pictures on the bare wall. A breach in the tiled roof,
just over a hole in the wooden ceiling, lets in a splash of sunlight,
by which one sees better, in a small adjoining room, the old hand
loom that used to belong to Lucia’s mother. A half-finished rug
of white, red and blue woolen stuff still lies entangled in the
cords, and sends up a cloud of dust at the slightest touch. The
dark kitchen has a spacious fireplace in which a few twigs are
feebly burning, even in summer; at other seasons it is lighted by
several candles on a piece of board hanging from a wooden ceiling
black from the smoke of many winters. There is but one bedroom.
An iron bed, with coverings bright and neat, fills half of it, touch¬
ing three of the undecorated walls. A potted plant stands on the
sill of the tiny window; another, with pink flowers, is on the
floor. Maria of the Angels explains that the bed was formerly in
the house of her parents, and that her sister Lucia was born in it.
Lucia was the youngest, as Maria was the oldest, of the seven
children of Antonio Abobora (or dos Santos), a small farmer and
sheep grower who owned pieces of land in various parts of the
Serra da Aire. He was a rather good-looking man with dark pas¬
sionate eyes, who liked conviviality better than going to Mass,
and wine more than work. His wife, Maria Rosa, was a devout,
almost severe Catholic, short, stout and muscular, with a heavy
mannish face which had a grave benignity, but on rare occasions
could relax in a motherly smile. There was no nonsense about
Maria Rosa, however. She never had time for it.
It was this strong parent who came into Lucia’s mind when,
in writing her memoirs, she began to examine her earliest recollec-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFMS43OKHwnFfqFTv6L1HsYc0WmUzH2PA_--JvdqyC04cqiOBwxR0x2QW3vfUcgk-s2qETc0bqoGwYGCzmDSwPpDbvoZ_KZWat5jiF_3qF7nh3pM0eykc6OgXt7LPosytruuDxNUQ=w491-h810-v0
tions. She could remember squirming in those stalwart arms, and
being conscious even then of her own personality and her own
actions. One of the first things she recalled was learning the “Ave
Maria” from her mother’s lips. “Hail, full of Grace! The Lord is
with thee! Blessed art thou among women!” The ancient prayer,
commencing with those words of an angel, is beautiful in any
language. But in Portuguese the syllables seem to have acquired
a rhythm peculiarly intense and memorable:
“Ave, Maria, cheia de gra$a, O Senhor e convosco! Bemdita
sois vos entre as mulheres, e bemdito e o fruto do vosso ventre, Jesus!
“Santa Maria, Mai de Deus, rogai por nos pecadores, agora e na
hora da nossa morte. Amen.”
Lucia has other memories of a more worldly sort. There were,
for instance, not a few furious battles in which one or another
of her four older sisters always bore off the victory, and left her
howling on the floor until her mother snatched her up and caressed
her. Lucia could hardly remember the time when she was not
under the spell of that passion for dancing to which peasants are
given even more than other human beings. This was especially
true of her two grown-up sisters, Maria of the Angels and Teresa.
And there were plenty of opportunities at Aljustrel. There was
sure to be a party somewhere on every holy day—the feast of the
Sacred Heart and Saint Anthony’s in June, that of Our Lady of
the Rosary in October, and of course, Christmas and Easter. Be¬
sides this, Maria Rosa was in great demand, either as a patron or
as a cook of renowned skill, whenever there was a wedding in any
of the dozen hamlets scattered about the Serra; and her older
daughters seldom failed to accompany her.
The problem of how to dispose of the baby on such occasions
was easily solved. Although she was hardly able to walk, much
less dance, Lucia was arrayed in an embroidered skirt with a shiny
belt, a splendid kerchief whose corners hung down in back and,
what pleased her most, a jaunty little hat glittering with gold
beads and bright feathers. She was then carried in the stout ma-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFXUGLoPvU2sxRRzTA4q38TVUB4rHX3IDCd-QlZp9bQ2pLxtTCsY-90r5y__RllUv-zBdaUMCPBkjc21OGSysb8vWsG1jc1V1s3nOaEmTUPdD6vmDHszs9ZMXqJ8RdSOiO4Rz13aA=w491-h810-v0
4 Our Lady of Fatima
ternal arms through the labyrinth of narrow roads that zigzag
across the irregular rocky fields between high stone walls; and when
the dancing began after supper, she was firmly deposited, for
safety from trampling feet, on one of those high wooden chests
that form a chief part of the furniture of every kitchen and living
room. From that eminence the tiny girl could watch the flushed
faces and the twinkling feet, and listen to the fascinating sounds
that came from a guitar or a harmonica. Sooner or later, no doubt,
she would fall asleep and remain rolled up against the wall until
it was time to go home-—more often than not when the first streaks
of dawn were mounting the eastern sky. For Lucia’s sisters could
never have enough of waltzes, which were all the rage at that
time.
At the Abobora residence, too, there were plenty of parties. In
summer the young people gathered under a large fig tree in the
patio, in winter in a shed adjoining the house. On such occasions
Maria Rosa would sit at the door of the little room opening on
the patio, where she could see all that might be going on inside
or outside. Sometimes she had a book open on her lap, sometimes
she would chat with some relative or friend while the young people
danced or jested. “She was always very serious,” according to
Lucia, “and everybody knew that whatever she said was like
Scripture, and that she must be obeyed in the house.” Some of
the visitors used to tell her that she was worth all of her daughters
put together. Perhaps that was an exaggeration, but she was not
displeased.
Maria Rosa was one of the few people in Aljustrel who could
read. “I don’t know why people like to gad about from house
to house,” she used to say. “All I want is to stay home quietly
and read. These books are very interesting. And the lives of the
saints—que belezal” Most of her books, in fact, were pious ones.
During the hours of the siesta in the summer and on winter
evenings she enjoyed teaching catechism not only to Lucia but
to other children of the neighborhood. In Lent she would read
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGKvE11dKK6EBuYuUtKoAlU5g_Odce_qBDsjT_F6_5dwsmQ6vIL1HrbU8wH-fZzkqY-o_a8PW-DNWTTXmQ3wOXDhIy2_hdVkw2in9OWRP2b9j25LA-cn3VNIULm-PkJ_mSdOS_QfQ=w491-h810-v0
accounts of the Passion of our Lord and books about the need of
prayer and penance. After supper, when Antonio and his son
Manuel had come frorri the fields, and the candles brightened
the glow from the hearth, the older girls and their father liked
to repeat old stones of giants, bewitched castles, enchanted prin¬
cesses. Lucia, of course, found these delightful. But her mother
would always seize the opportunity, in between the profane chron¬
icles, to tell something more edifying.
On Sundays Maria Rosa and her daughters—and sometimes
Antonio—would hear Mass at the village church of Fatima. This
has been greatly altered and in part rebuilt since 1917. The floor
of wide boards is halved by a tiled walk that runs from the main
door halfway to the altar; then, under a Roman arch, there is a
lift in the floor where the old church begins. The walls are tiled
in bright blue, white and yellow, from the floor to a height of
some six feet. On each side there is a confessional, and toward the
front of the church there is a third movable one for emergencies.
Instead of pews, there are long rough unstable wooden benches.
The bluish green ceiling is high enough to give an impression of
dignity and solemnity, if not of grandeur; the dome over the small
main altar is deep azure and studded with stars.
Some of the statues are extraordinarily lifelike. There is one
of Saint Anthony, for whom the church is named, in a glass case
for greater protection. Saint Francis stands near by, his brown
habit somewhat incongruously embroidered with gold, to suggest,
no doubt, his glorification in Fleaven; and the Child Jesus in his
arms has a lovely expression in his eyes, which follow the beholder
about in a way that must have made quite an impression upon
Lucia and other children. This is at the right of the main altar.
At the left, in front of the church, stands another which un¬
doubtedly, from her own account, had a strong influence upon
the mind of Lucia. It is one of Our Lady of the Rosary, clad in
a crimson gown and a blue mantle ornamented with gold, holding
in her arms a rather unhappy looking Child. Her own face is
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEoB8alsuxEBsaspa5yjmPcxwrdE9NZ5K_3qRchOzeDvE_QeWknyVDkufG4jTI9ztE5gMswJIAOPH-wIcs_lo783tlO8JFSQM8qD58iDznpUcMhgpjewjaZ1QHvOsKamd6tOlDNxw=w491-h810-v0
uncommonly serious, in fact almost severe and reproving, while
the glance of her light brown eyes is arresting and piercing, in
one hand she holds a rosary of fifteen decades. Below her there
is a statue of the girl martyr Saint Quiteria, in a pink robe spangled
with stars and a blue cincture. Here Lucia as a child often knelt
to pray.
Near the altar of the Sacred Heart now stands a statue of Our
Lady of Fatima. Her dark brown eyes look over the right shoulder
of the beholder with a soft and appealing affection; her robes are
pale blue. But this was not there in 1917.
On the right hand side of the church is a striking Crucifixion.
The Christus is very short and stocky, like a Portuguese of the
mountains, and is spattered with vivid blood from head to feet.
Above is an unusual picture of Our Lady of Mount Carmel. The
Child in her arms has a scapular in each hand, and both are gazing
out over a vision of hell, into whose flames are falling naked souls
of the damned; while others stand in peril, gazing sadly away
from the Mother and Infant, though on one side a youth is
being plucked from the pit by an angel, and on another a young
girl is saved.
On Sundays and feasts the church would be filled with people
from the villages of the Serra da Aire, and the open fields round
about would be full of family groups, with their earthenware water
jugs and lunchbaskets, their burros, mules and carts of various
sorts. From his house behind the church, with many a genial word,
the parish priest would pass. The bell in the steeple would fling
its clear tones for miles through the clean sunny air. The women
would crowd to the benches near the sanctuary, while most of
the men and boys, save those few who might be going to Com¬
munion, would stand in the rear; and then the Mass would begin.
It was customary for children at that time to prepare to receive
their first Holy Communion at the age of about nine or ten. It
was in 1910, when Lucia was three years old, that Pope Pius X
reminded the world of Christ’s command, “Suffer the little ones
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH2ZEM7gqF-4L2INPDAvO1yhGY0DzhBhniThcFJTY9wu5lOOHoP0K_dWvMvQfUw4ccTDrO9OcHP_9s-2mUdmGO9iDjby_puQRxhgddvxXyxJ6IsCuHiR8ToY8NhCONgPb0owUW5BA=w491-h810-v0
to come to me, and forbid them not.” Possibly Maria Rosa had
heard of this decree. It seems clear that she resolved, when her
youngest daughter was only six, that the time had come for her
to receive the hidden Jesus of the Blessed Sacrament; and aided
by Caroline, who was then eleven and had received, she drilled
her in the questions and answers of the penny catechism. When
at last she felt that her pupil was ready for an examination she
took her to the church.
The Prior received them with kindness, and then, sitting in a
chair on a platform in the sacristy, began to ask the child ques¬
tions. “Who made the world?” “How many gods are there?”
“What is man?” “Why did God make us?” “What must we do
to be saved?” And so on through the list that all Catholic children
study.
It seemed to Lucia and her mother that she had not done badly.
Yet after a little reflection the good priest decided that she was too
young, and had better wait for another year.
It was the very day before the First Communion. They had never
expected such a crushing blow. Almost stunned by disappointment,
they went from the sacristy to one of the benches in the church, and
sat with heads bowed, thinking. Lucia began to sob.
It happened that a Jesuit missionary from Lisboa, Father Cruz,
had been preaching a tnduum at Saint Anthony’s to prepare for
this First Communion, and was helping Father Pena to hear the
many confessions. As he passed through the church, he saw the
little girl in distress and stopped to ask what was the trouble. On
hearing the story he tested her with questions from the catechism,
and then took her back to the Prior in the sacristy.
“This child knows her doctrine better than many of the others
who are going to receive,” he said.
“But she is only six years old!” objected Father Pena.
The Jesuit persisted. He was a gentle and humble man, but
determined; and to the intense joy of Lucia, the Prior finally yielded.
Now she must go to the sacrament of penance, so that she could
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFXsAgJP4UMtV-WcDMv7mIUIaQrwHdERCpAAjFIAG9cVYlqphHpPnVX4LcLaDgdkGN09hjoyy3OgAShYTv0QPcwuSU-6XPSdtjcYEQVdGliOAsq4lgy9cKL9wdVbTjRiQ3UMbjIDQ=w491-h810-v0
offer a spotless heart and conscience to the divine Guest who was
coming next day.
It was at the movable confessional, which had been placed near
the sacristy door, that Father Cruz heard her first confession. What
a blessing! The famous Jesuit preacher was believed by many in
Portugal to be a saint; and he could hardly have talked even with
a small child without communicating some of his fervent love of
God. He was a tall man of fifty, much bent from study and
austerities. When Lucia had finished telling her peccadilloes, she
heard him say in a low voice:
“My daughter, your soul is the temple of the Holy Spirit. Keep
it always pure, so that He can carry on His divine action in it.”
She promised, and said her act of contrition. She asked Our Lady
to help her receive the Body and Blood of her Son worthily on the
next day. Then she arose, and returned to her mother.
Maria Rosa looked embarrassed and out of sorts, and the women
about her, for some reason or other, were laughing and whispering.
But Lucia paid little attention to this; she was thinking only of what
the priest had said. She knelt at the rail before the statue of Our
Lady of the Rosary, looked up at the sad face with the searching
eyes, and said to her:
“Please keep my poor heart for God.”
And “it seemed to me,” she wrote years later, “that she smiled,
and with a kindly look and gesture told me she would.”
Maria Rosa was waiting for her. “Don’t you know,” she
demanded as they started down the road to Aljustrel, “that your
confession is a secret, and must be made in a low voice?”
Lucia hung her head.
“Everybody heard you.”
Silence.
“They heard everything except the last thing you said to the
priest.”
Lucia scuffed resolutely along.
“What was the last thing you said to him?” asked her mother.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEgKe4_N-TiaLfp5dw4gav4hyKdbNaLMIS_DMU2FHFTQEb_vQkxGWVpIlQKeqpJXa2-XW-4p80PTVyQgSF64r8ZWFxCtfPpqboSf-4de7280qdYBVI4qy37g_d1MpUSZ0PkRbkz=w491-h810-v0
9 Our Lady of Fatima
No reply! Maria Rosa persisted all the way home, but she never
learned the secret. Lucia was always a reticent child. As soon as she
saw that anyone was trying to make her talk, she would take refuge
in a sullen silence that could be very exasperating.
That night her sisters worked late to get her ready for the great
event of her life. There was a new white dress to be fitted, a garland
of flowers to be woven to crown her dark hair. And when at last
they let her go to bed, she was unable to sleep, thinking of all that
had happened and all that was going to happen. What if nobody
woke her for Mass next morning? Every hour she got up to see
what time it was. It seemed as if the dawn would never come.
At last it did, however, and Maria came to call her. No doubt
she gave the usual caution not to take a drink, or eat anything, for
one must fast before Holy Communion. She made the final
adjustments of the white dress and the garland. Then she presented
Lucia to her parents, telling her that she must beg their pardon for
her sins, kiss their hands, and ask their blessing. The little girl
obeyed, and they blessed her.
“And mind you don’t forget to ask Our Lady to make you a
saint!” added Maria Rosa.
The family set out for the church. When Lucia could not keep
up with the others her mother scooped her up in her strong arms,
for it was late, and carried her the rest of the way.
There was no need of such haste. Some of the visiting priests
from distant places had not yet arrived, and the Missa Cantata did
not start for quite a while. This gave Lucia an opportunity to kneel
once more before the statue of Our Lady of the Rosary and carry out
her mother’s instructions.
“Make me a saint!” she whispered. “Please ask Our Lord to
make me a saint!”
Again she thought she saw the sad face relax into a smile of
encouragement. She was not the first to report such an experience
before a statue or a picture; there was little Saint Therese of Lisieux,
for example, among others. Nor does Lucia attach too much
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHeGtPr47RHz6bVqlByN6IF0pwRJFy4DGyrh3yGhpFt-BXcEzNMMxg1T6X5uzP0NQbQ2TalZ9Fldwyas2pjfNWjgy1S9c4X8d5P8u5glm8P_rm5M7KKSL68P05ToychzbPoe-ba=w491-h810-v0
significance to what theologians consider the least reliable sort of.
locution. “I don’t know whether the facts I have written about my
First Communion were a reality, or a little girl’s illusion,” she wrote
modestly when her bishop commanded her to commit all her
spiritual adventures to paper. “All I know is that they had a great
influence in uniting me to God all my life.” She remained so long
gazing at the smiling Madonna that her sisters had to come and
take her away. The procession was already forming.
Lucia was the youngest and smallest of the four long files of
children, two of girls and two of boys; and she was the first to
receive. When the priest placed the white Host on her tongue,
she felt, in her own words, “an unalterable serenity and peace.”
During all the remainder of the Mass she kept saying in her heart,
over and over, “Lord, make me a saint! Keep my heart always pure,
for You alone!” And she distinctly heard Him say within her,
“The grace that I grant thee today will remain living in thy soul,
producing fruits of eternal life.”
It was afternoon when the Missa Cantata ended, for the sermon
was long, and it took some time for the children to renew their
baptismal vows. When they were finally released, they trooped
out of the church and separated into little groups, shouting, talking,
running, some munching on pieces of bread their mothers had
brought.
Lucia remained kneeling in the blue and rosy light that came
through the stained-glass windows. Her mother was alarmed,
thinking she must be weak from hunger, and dragged her away.
But when they got home the child could hardly eat. She was
surfeited with the Bread of Angels, and she felt as if no other food
would ever attract or satisfy her. For a long time after that people
noticed that she seemed absorbed, abstracted, almost dazed.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFu0eYEZZWJQA0sUYjfXaGHdaavoPyTC1W9d6YOkfkVswk6ctjyn7ge2_On9gAwFsK8xUKzvuKwagRir90STmmuiMNA6pjwryRnCSDYC0HzicaUQhpdOzq0ItSCyCMyVej3SAIW=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER II
When Lucia’s second teeth began to come in, it was evident that
nature was not preparing her to be “Miss Portugal.” For they were
large, projecting and irregular, causing the upper lip to protrude
and the heavy lower one to hang, while the tip of her snub nose
turned up more than ever. Sometimes in repose her swarthy face
suggested a nature that could be sullen, stubborn and defiant, if not
perverse. But the appearance was deceptive, for under the stimulus
of any emotion, the light brown eyes could flash or twinkle, and the
little dimples that creased her cheeks when she smiled contributed to
an expression quite charming. Her voice was, and still is, rather high
and thin, Older persons often found her too silent and reserved,
though quick enough to obey and to help with her strong, stubby
hands. Younger children, however, were strongly attracted to her,
perhaps because she felt at ease with them and loved to tell them
stories by the hour. She had a gift for narration, with a sense of
humor and pathos, and under the awkward exterior the instinct of
the little ones discovered a sound intelligence and a warm and
motherly heart.
Among those most devoted to her were two of her numerous
cousins, Francisco and Jacinta (or Hyacinthe) Marto. At first
Lucia used to avoid them; in fact she found them rather tiresome
and troublesome. As they grew older they began to interest her,
and in time there was a perpetual running back and forth between
her house and theirs. They were the two youngest children of her
father’s sister, Olimpia of Jesus, and her second husband, Manuel
Pedro Marto.
Lucia was fond of her uncle and aunt. Ti Qlimpia had had two
children by her first husband, Jose Ferndandes Rosa; and by Ti
Marto, whom she had married in 1897 (when she was twenty-eight
and he twenty-four) she had nine more, of whom Francisco was the
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHKjH-1eERa6o7arkry4ZeWR2tGJnxSYDMd3Vj59uQ5_I1qAC7_8EtSQIuOE-NVBoZNZWLXPfhmgEkPxRJP7pax8KhTzyfw0AeojT20ixR0MDXyPjqyGQQrZkXTz6q03CAUMPxjGw=w491-h810-v0
eighth and Jacinta the last.1 Compared to sturdy Maria Rosa she
looked thin, tall and pale. But appearances are not always trust¬
worthy, for Olimpia has survived her sister-in-law by many years.
Her large hands are as capable as ever as she moves lightly about her
cottage at Aljustrel, and there is something strangely youthful in
the smile that comes easily to the toothless mouth and small shrewd
eyes of this woman of seventy-eight, who bore eleven children. She
gives the impression of having been a good companionable wife and
an affectionate mother, even though she never learned to read or
write. In spiritual matters she was content with a decent minimum,
and might have been satisfied with less but for the intervention of
circumstances hardly to be expected. When I made some remark
last summer about all the work she accomplishes, she said simply,
as if stating a fact rather than boasting, “I am a strong woman.”
Ti Marto is a man of exceptional character, who would command
instant respect anywhere. He must have seemed rather a romantic
figure to Lucia in the days when she and his children were growing
up together. He had the straight carriage, the cropped moustache,
the ‘‘butch” haircut, the quiet decisive manner, the sophistication
of outlook of one who had been a soldier in Africa, and had seen
something more of the world than the Serra da Aire. At seventy-
four he still stands quite erect, and keeps his gray hair and
moustache trimmed closely. He has generous ear lobes, keen honest
brown eyes, hands expressive and capable. He too never learned
to read or write. But unlike his brother-in-law, Antonio, he never
cared much for gaming or carousing. He worked hard, paid his bills,
saved a little for rainy days, of which there were plenty, and had
enough left over to take Olimpia and the girls occasionally to the
Sunday market at Batalha, to buy new shoes for holiday wear, or
some finery or other. His conversation has always been salted with
the dry wit of those who work outdoors. ‘‘There aren’t any poor
people around here,” he remarked last summer as we watched
1 Francisco was born June 11, 1908; Jacinta, March 11, 1910.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQES-S3E06lcSk7h3S1CTIDf0QPQUnGGzx2nQzheqCfTC3klI7wFHRZO1LYpd-8_dlLmthXrxe9cUJ86AcpIOisUCYk_c87iRNg371DsB58wpE0AyMqRfbMzFF0OYAyOdJjMhpllDw=w491-h810-v0
f3 Our Lady of Fatima
women go by barefoot with great jugs of water on their heads.
“Everybody in these mountains has shoes. Of course, if anybody
wants to give them anything, they’ll take it. But they have enough.”
It was inevitable that a man of his natural dignity should be
something of a personage throughout the Serra da Aire. I saw him
rise to greet the distinguished Archbishop of Evora with great respect
but no servility; and they spoke together like those who know that
as men they are equals. Nor was there ever any doubt as to who was
master in the Marto home. “People always said there was peace in
this house,” he remarked, “and so there was, because I saw to it.
All I had to do was speak, and my boys would keep quitt. They
knew that if they didn’t they’d get a lambasting.2 But that wasn’t
necessary. Just because a burro gives a kick, you don’t have to cut
his leg off right away.”
Francisco was very much like his father. He was a handsome child
with fine steady eyes and regular features, and was generally
amiable, considerate and obedient. Yet his father is proud of the
fact that he had the animal spirits of a normal boy, and now and
then had to be taken in hand, as on a certain evening when he
decided not to say his prayers. He was never afraid of anything,
either. He would go out boldly on the darkest or foggiest night,
when others of his age would shrink from the vast unknown of the
Serra. Or he would catch wild rabbits or foxes, and make pets of
them. He liked to pick up snakes and lizards on the end of his stick,
and thrust them in a pool of water to make them drink, or watch
them wiggle away. “What a man he would have been!” Ti Marto
says from time to time, with a sigh. And Olimpia, with shining
eyes, agrees.
Jacinta, two years younger than her brother, had the same fine
and even features; but the straight line of her brows, close above her
clear and well spaced eyes, suggested a better intelligence. She was
as quick and blithe as a bird, always running or jumping or dancing.
2 "Lampadadasis the Portuguese equivalent. This is one of Marto’s reminiscences
recorded in the excellent book by Father De Marchi, p. 34.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHqXpoNteeEwKxSHUqyQ9xJ7iFbJx0m3uGcaDoPAOaF_TFlLxHV0Rg3zfW-sNb5mePm4QtqJUqoceekBcpLQRN3hmP6WhyXtIm2NK-Ww2_2WJq2P1am1wehp0vC6rmnl6wKUay4=w491-h810-v0
14 Our Lady of Fatima
Perhaps it was because she had affectionate parents that she gave the
impression of being made up wholly of affection—so long as she got
what she wanted. For Jacinta had been spoiled a little, too, as the
baby of a large family, and she could pout or sulk on slight
provocation. This was one reason why Lucia found her annoying
when she first began to play with her in 1914. Still, Jacinta was only
four! Her father still remembers that she could be very stubborn
and independent at times. For some reason she made up her mind
to say, “Hail Mary, full of graces,” instead of “full of grace,” and
no one, he told me with some pride, could ever induce her to use
the correct singular.
The Martos now live just across the road from their former
habitation, between the Abobora house and Fatima. It is a humble
residence, like some of those in Nazareth or Betham .ang ago,
but Senhora Olimpia was as composed and gracious as any lady in
the land as she went about barefoot in her sombre everyday attire
of black and gray, to show it to me. There was little furniture in
the living room except an old-fashoned clock, no longer functioning,
and a massive unpainted wooden chest; nor is there any window
there or in one of the two bedrooms. The kitchen is lighted by a
small overhead pane of glass, perhaps six by eighteen inches. From
the hearth, where a good fire burns in winter, came a feeble glow
from a handful of twigs, for the day was very hot. An antique
kettle stood by some earthen jugs for water, oil and wine. A rosary
hung from a nail in the wall.
Outside was a patio, sheltered by a stone wall and carpeted thick
with twigs from a couple of fig trees growing beside a fence. The
smell of sheep and goats, mingling with the pleasanter aromas from
trees and flowers and the ever-pungent something of the soil,
brings fleas and gnats to this inclosure on a summer afternoon. But
Olimpia smiles with pride as she displays at one end of it the old
outdoor brick oven in which she bakes great loaves of bread once a
week. It used to be twice a week when the children were growing
up. “Yes, I am a strong woman!” she repeats, closing her mouth
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFdAteE0Scm-jgemkonL6eR6DraYq3IsRMynR8SS5OaL6I9KpvdVF5q9jk1XPMIr4uCl-z0JNK6cksorPfCDBlTqMl4wWX2CpPPT7OhpdqoK6WcVdtegJjeYFYBuGOBI4N9gRYvRg=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 15
resolutely, and looking out across the fence at a striking panorama
of fields and pastures between two ranges of mountains. On a
high hill opposite were some antique windmills like those that
Don Quixote tilted with in Spain; and the quadruple wings slowly
revolved and glistened in the fierce July sunshine.
The games that Lucia and her two youngest cousins used to play
in or about the two cottages were those that children play
everywhere: tag, forfeits, cops and robbers, “Button, button,
who’s got the button?” and another called, “Pass the ring.” When
they were tired of such amusements, Lucia would tell them stories,
usually the ones she had heard from her parents and elder sisters
around the hearth after supper on winter nights: hair-raising tales of
witches, fairies and goblins, giants and enchanted princesses, such
as Antonio "and his older daughters liked to relate, and the holier
ones from the more serious lips of Maria Rosa.
What interested Jacinta most was the story of the Passion of
Christ, which Lucia, with the native talent that shows sporadically
in her four memoirs, must have made graphic enough. Jesus
praying alone in the Garden while His friends slept and His
enemies plotted; Jesus being scourged while His Mother looked on,
weeping; Jesus staggering under His heavy cross and falling on
bloody knees under the weight of it; Jesus dying in thirst and agony,
and for our sins, not His—all this made a profound impression on
the generous hearts of both the Marto children, but especially on
that of the little girl. “Poor little Lord!” she would say. “Poor,
poor Our Lord! I am never going to commit another sin, if it
makes You suffer so much!”
One day, when the children were playing in the Santos house,
Lucia’s brother Manuel, who was writing a letter at a table, looked
up suddenly and said, jokingly:
“Come, Jacinta, give me a hug and a kiss!”
“Ask me for something else,” said the little girl.
“No, that’s all I want—three kisses,” he teased.
“The only one I will kiss is Our Lord. I’ll give Lfirn all the
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQER7z8bPUim53QQtsvhrYINTx_8r-PXwa4esV_9UoBHDNTiIcNsChzEy6OmggV8wWuV9KYGl086OiPuhIZdaDroVjZjY16RaezWUZ3CDtzHP3xu294ZjXCUrZGD2XbmEHTqmF7xaA=w491-h810-v0
kisses He wants.” And running to a crucifix that hung on a wall,
she covered it with kisses.
This crucifix never ceased to attract her. One day she took it
from the wall and was looking at it affectionately when Maria came
in and, thinking that Lucia was to blame, began to scold. Didn’t
she know that holy things were not to play with?
“Maria, don’t spank her!” pleaded Jacinta. “It was all my fault.
I won’t do it again.”
Maria gave the rascal a hug, and packed them all out-of-doors, to
play in the sunshine. They ran through the patio, and down the
sloping field behind the house to the threshing floor. This was a
square place paved with concrete on which, for too many years to
remember, the Aboboras have shucked the wild bush beans that
grow all about the meadows, and have threshed their wheat with
flails such as have been used in that country for centuries. There is
a good fragrance there, especially when someone has trampled a
bit of the wild mint that grows among the beans and the brown
grass. The view, too, is excellent. All down the valley, on the
dusty green of the olive trees, there is a shimmer of silver, save on
the darker verdure of pines, figs or holm oaks, or an occasional field
of maize or cabbage.
A few yards from the threshing floor is an old and precious well,
one of the few sources of water in that part of the Serra. It is covered
by several heavy slabs of stone, very convenient to sit on; and there,
hour after hour, in the shade of three olive trees, the children would
he and talk, or simply gaze at the stubble fields where the reddish
soil, scattered with jagged rocks and speckled with purple thistles,
wild red roses, tufts of brown grass, and withering bush beans with
pods standing upright, stretched out into a valley where nothing
ever looked quite the same twice. It was especially beautiful there in
the early morning or late afternoon. It was heavenly at night when a
cool wind came whistling down under the star-pricked vastitude of
iet- When the olive trees were shedding their buds, Maria Rosa was
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFJSnDcBAlg8HxyYCA-7odydSUaGkbWPLHD8HBePNXTevaclI39PQwYXpnrtM4h3fC0aDlBj3u06YxHYv1lViL5qMUfqgNEhStv4I_1Q_Xl6ZILfr95v3-_RyF9yRtLTZFCY0oGMA=w491-h810-v0
J7 Our Lady of Fatima
stern in her insistence that the children keep away from them, if
they were going to play about the well. For the buds had a way of
getting into the hair, the blouse or the long skirt of Lucia or Jacinta,
and then would manage, somehow, to get into the well and spoil
the water. Fdence if any buds were found on Lucia’s clothing at
night, she would get a spanking on general principles—literally,
in Portuguese, a “scraping.” Or next day she would be kept indoors,
and would have the additional pain of hearing Jacinta and Francisco
chirp under a window, asking why she did not come out.
From the well, too, they enjoyed seeing the new sunlight flood
the valley in the morning, and the huge shadows creep from the
mountains at dusk, after the sun had disappeared in a splendor of
crimson and gold and purple. Jacinta was especially fond of
watching sunsets. But she liked even better, after supper, to see the
stars come out, and to count them until they became too numerous.
What fun to look up at them through the branches of one of the fig
trees near the well, and how much larger and more brilliant they
seemed there! Lucia called them the lamps of the angels. The moon
was the lamp of Our Lady. And the sun? Obviously the lamp of
Our Lord.
“I like the lamp of Our Lord best,” Francisco would say.
“I don’t,” returned Jacinta. “It burns and blinds people. I like
the lamp of Our Lady.”
This dispute seemed destined to go on forever. But in the summer
of 1914 it had to yield to one of those catalyses that sometimes
occur in families, as if some invisible poison had turned their
happiness to discontent and their peace to anxiety and dissension.
The agent at work in the Abobora family was not invisible, to be
sure; it was the wine that Antonio drank more and more of with
various cronies in those dark little roadside taverns that mysteriously
survive, in Portugal, even where habitations are few. The poor man
was drinking up not only his fields and his cattle, his self-respect and
his old age, but also the health and good-humor of his wife and
children. Things had come to such a pass that Maria Rosa had to
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHk3ecQRsR9x6EG71p96CXcbw4lN76YEuflvVoQ1dEGkaDTVWotRFbvKFqeYipxvygDWYtq2TJPMUrOoK1HlsoSWiMOz2_TBPRyGFGj-AmjGekhgPHTfnhOAtshr2xijWeV8pqe=w491-h810-v0
18 Our Lady of Fatima
hire herself out as a domestic nurse, sometimes for all night,
sometimes for days at a stretch. She was especially in demand when
a baby was born,- and sometimes, being very charitable, she would
bring home three or four little children to care for while their mother
was ill. It fell to the older girls, then, to look after the house and to
help Manuel in the fields. Caroline’s job had been to pasture the
small flock of sheep and goats on family lots in various parts of the
Serra. But now she was thirteen, and Maria Rosa decided that she
ought to be able to earn some money sewing and weaving. There
was no reason why Lucia could not take over the flock. She was
seven years old, and a big girl for her age.
All the rest (except Lucia) dissented vigorously. Antonio
felt that it would be a disgrace to have so young a child working,
and his older daughters agreed. But Maria Rosa, with her stronger
will, prevailed as usual.
Lucia was enchanted. It made her feel so grown up to think of
being a shepherdess. Francisco and Jacinta, on the other hand, were
heartbroken. Now they would have no one to play with, no one to
tell them stories. In vain they begged their mother to let them go
along, with the sheep of the Martos. At six and four, said Olimpia,
they were much too young. So Lucia, after some preliminary
instruction from Caroline and the rest, went forth alone one
morning, with a long staff to prod the dozen or more sheep and one
or two goats that belonged to her father, and slowly made her way
down the winding road toward the open fields in the valley.
It was not so very difficult, once she got into the meadows, for
there she found plenty of other children who were glad to have her
companionship and to initiate her into the pastoral mysteries. There
are no lush green meadows in this part of Portugal, and nothing
approaching the richness of the Irish fields, where the sheep are
twice as large. Still, the Portuguese flocks manage to keep alive and
to produce good wool by straying over a considerable area every day,
nibbling the sparse grass even when it turns brown in midsummer;
and when they find a place they like, they all crowd together and
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGexoPOSdCJiHOlcuEuGhNmmOCSRCHhk27hoiNyzC6sVXLXmKt36FB9ks6qbFpAHjANxPTZmV0DNDr1DiWjLLbipJbfumoqHxYzAoOcc4wH7HvB18CWUkFpFzvdABOGyQOphD-T=w491-h810-v0
J9 Our Lady of Fatima
remain for some time munching in peace. This gives the shepherds
ample time for games and conversation. Lucia was welcomed on this
first day by three girls from a neighboring village, whom she knew
slightly: Tereza Matias and her sister Maria Rosa, and one Maria
Justino. Their combined flocks were so numerous that they seemed
to spread over the Serra, Lucia remembers, “like a cloud.”
It was a great deal of fun, if one had good company, to spend the
whole day wandering about the wild and beautiful countryside.
Usually the young shepherdess would guide her flock between the
stone walls of a long winding road to where it crossed the highway
from Ourem to Leiria. By the roadside lay the shallow and sluggish
waters of what was called the Lagoa, though the children preferred
to name it the barreiro, or mud-hole. It was not quite as bad as that,
for not only did peasants come from miles around to water their
sheep, burros and oxen, but the women from several hamlets would
bring their laundry there, and almost any day three or four of them
could be seen standing up to their knees in the still water, their
skirts tied up about their waists, scrubbing on a flat rock or board,
while their small children ran naked on the muddy shore or splashed
at the shallow edge of the pond. It was here usually that Lucia
would meet the other girls. After their flocks had^ad a good drink,
they would herd them all together, and drive them to the pasture
where they wished to spend the day.
A favorite place was on some land that Lucia’s father owned,
about a mile west of the Lagoa, and more than twice as far from
Aljustrel, in a great hollow or bowl, whose name, the Cova da Iria,
suggests that there perhaps a girl saint’s prayers may have won her
the courage to protect her virtue even at the cost of life. At all events,
there was something about the place that always had a strong appeal
for Lucia and her friends. Under the vault of ineffable blue
(especially over the northern slope) there was a various undulating
scene. The grayish green of innumerable olive trees was broken by
the darker tinge and thicker foliage of many evergreens, par¬
ticularly of the holm oak family. The branches of the carrasqueira
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEY-7fS-za9UwSouvJaqHYwps_lj0YKmHD-mK9rJjJ0zI1OCbgDGSaiw637NEmYQH3a2VKvL685XMHSemWsdQioxIL373DuBMd-an-CqJ9ynut2top6isujFax0l7bNyqDi93YiEQ=w491-h810-v0
20 Our Lady of Fatima
spread widely and gave a fine shade. The azinheira was a dwarfed
variety, three to six feet high. In some places the grass grew long
enough to be cut as hay. Much of the soil is reddish clay, and
seems fit to produce only small wild flowers and thistles; but its
barren look is deceptive, for when turned over it packs down and
holds moisture even during a long arid summer, and bears diminu¬
tive but good potatoes, besides cabbages and corn. Lucia’s father
owned several cultivated patches in the Cova da Ina.
Sometimes they would spend all day there. Or they would go,
after lunch, to a wild place to the south called Valinhos. The
ground there was cut up into numerous fields of irregular shape,
surrounded by thick stone walls four to six feet high, and so
strewn with rocks, far and wide, that the wonder is that it ever
occurred to anybody to fence it off for pastureland. Yet there is
much good grass among the jagged rocks, and as there are many
breaches in the ancient walls, it is easy to herd the sheep from
one lot to another; besides, there are some large trees that give
a good shade.
From Valinhos the land rises rapidly southward, wall after wall,
to the top of a rugged hill called O Cabego, The Head. On the
crest of this was an antique windmill (still there, but shorn of its
wings) from which one had a magnificent view in all directions for
many miles. At the very top, on the southern side, runs a rather
irregular ledge from east to west. In one place the crag is hollowed
out into a partial cave, which gives some protection when rain
or a cold wind comes from the northwest. Scattered about, too,
were many boulders and chunks of gray granite. It was fun to
play among them or just to sit on them and watch the flocks
nibbling on the slope below. Farther down, the checkered land¬
scape spread out in three directions to vast ranges of mountains.
Just below, to the south, was a deep green valley from which
arose some tall pines that waved and moaned when the wind blew.
Beyond them, a few miles away, were several farms much larger
than those of Aljustrel. There one could almost always see some-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHzwEp9-UPqrF3HS5tXIJOi3U4xw5ejl-wCPi2ROvIPg4GLlsqFhXlqhRcPFrfA9CL0FeJJdmfWRFAHMNZNKziONn4OTKSDKkFn2ept_QSGhT1lpZzO83GoV3CMTbKRB_lziFdrww=w491-h810-v0
21 Our Lady of Fatima
thing interesting: men plowing or sowing or reaping, according
to the season, or threshing with the implements of a thousand
years ago. Or it was fun to watch, pn the far heights, the squarish
sails of old mills revolving and veering with the caprices of the
west wind. The range at the east was of a sterner sort, like a clump
of enormous rocks—from a plane, as a matter of fact, they seem
only a small part of one huge piece of calcareous gray that runs
for hundreds of miles the length of Portugal. At the other end of
the valley are some friendlier mountains, covered with greenery'.
It was thrilling to see all this from one place. And such a
pleasant place! Every'thing about Cabefo is clean, fragrant and
peaceful. The sunshine seems to laugh there all day long. The
wand howls overhead and does no harm. Up there it seems good
to breathe, to be alive, to be free.
Lucia began to enjoy her conversations with Teresa Matias and
the other girls, all the more as she discovered in herself a certain
ascendancy of intellect that could make them do whatever she
wished. Teresa, now' the mother of nine children, remembers that
it w'as Lucia who led m the dancing and singing, and taught them
new songs. One of these was in praise of Our Lady of Mount
Carmel, and began thus:
Name of Mary',
Oh! how' lovely!
Save my soul.
For it is yours!
Lady of Carmel
Bring me word
To pray three times
In blessing and praise.
In blessing and praise
I have to pray.
Lady of Carmel
Help me, do!
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHpaql120f2CPK1HuMt7aOI8IGG-JCR0JOHrCtXq2KIGoDi1DEMfHHw2hllsvvhDjK7d25pc6QPAYrQoPHWYPwY1NUIgC7prc5NilkLRKhx-7ya3NvGRGIlR34E_x1waFGlvMph6g=w491-h810-v0
In heaven three bows
To the weight of the cross,
Pray three times
Help me Jesus! Help me, Jesus!
Help me, Jesus! 8
One day Lucia and the three other shepherdesses were saying
the Rosary together after lunch among the rocks along the ridge
at Cabego, when one of them called attention to a strange white
something that was moving majestically from east to west, far
over the deep valley. As it approached them it came to a pause over
the pine grove, and remained suspended in the air for some little
time. Lucia remembers it as “a figure like a statue made of snow
which the rays of the sun had turned somewhat transparent.” It
seemed to have the form of a human being.
“What is that?” asked one of the girls.
“I don’t know,” said Lucia.
They continued the Rosary, their eyes still fixed upon the mysteri¬
ous Thing; and as they finished, it disappeared in the sunny air.
Lucia characteristically said nothing about this at home. Others
were not so reticent.3 4 The news finally got to Maria Rosa, and as
usual, she was curious.
“Look here!” she said to her daughter. “They say you’ve seen I
don’t know what! What was it you saw?”
“I don’t know,” replied Lucia. “It looked like somebody wrapped
up in a sheet. There were no eyes or hands on it.”
“Silly girls’ nonsense!” Maria Rosa made a gesture of disgust.
After some time, and at the very same place, the same thing hap¬
pened again. In fact it happened a third time during the summer
3 Op. cit., p. 45.
4 Senhora Maria da Freitas, a Portuguese ‘writer and daughter of a famous editor
of O Seculo, told me in the summer of 1946 that long before she had heard any¬
thing about the apparitions at Fatima, a woman of the district repeated to her an
apparently absurd tale brought home by her daughter, who said she and some others
had seen a “white man without any head floating in the air.”'
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE21Pw1pUVsmMGoOXmWMpnQzmTDz3RsgxXz6iDKiPtLUb8tt2TY8J35xcDVCFhVFaw-PFRq9YABURati3aFple_qGNlI75DE6yTEsTZ5p4sZeAsUYq1h6qsqYPQWB7VFQx5hmE2LQ=w491-h810-v0
of 1915, as nearly as Lucia can establish the date. Maria Rosa,
hearing the gossip, was a little more insistent in her questioning.
“Now let us see! What was it you say you saw over there?”
“I don’t know, Mother, I don’t know what it was.” 5
Neighbors began to twit Lucia about the apparition, and to
exchange knowing or pitying glances when she passed. Her older
sisters thought it had something to do with the abstraction they
had noticed in her since the day of her First Communion, and
often, when she seemed to be day-dreaming, one of them would
say:
“What’s the matter, Lucia? Have you seen somebody wrapped
up in a sheet?”
Lucia said nothing. What was the use of talking, when she
didn’t understand it herself?
5 Lucia herself tells about these apparitions in her second Memoir, p. 9, written
in 1937.
1
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFuNDX4FMkJvMaZvwgVy33Seq8VfD3f6EBARxQBEGv4CeNo8QD18qdqsTvrO0i9mU8nMNzR5ZltfpkhxZ9EhZH1IuDlEEAxJMeuuiPbXn5umAR1bF18olejahUN-JYt9LfPWdOqkQ=w502-h812-v0
CHAPTER III
Francisco and Jacinta were usually waiting for her at twilight
when she drove the sheep into the dusty patio at Aljustrel. The
boy was unconcerned, but the little girl would run to meet her,
bringing all the news. Every night it was the same. She had asked
her mother again to let her tend sheep with Lucia, and her mother
had refused. Jacinta took this very much to heart. If the evening
happened to be misty or cloudy, she was pensive to the verge of
tears. “The angels aren’t going to light their lamps tonight,” she
would say. “And Our Lady’s lamp hasn’t any oil in it.”
While she and Lucia inclosed the sheep for the night, Francisco
would sit on a stone in front of the Abobora cottage, and play a
tune on his ptfaro, a little wooden fife that he treasured. Then
he would follow them to the threshing floor near the well, and
watch with them until the stars began to come out. But he was
never as enthusiastic about this as he was about the rising and
the setting of the sun. “No lamp is as beautiful as Our Lord’s!”
he would insist, and any manifestation of the power of that lamp
delighted him beyond measure. The glint of sunlight on drops of
dew or on the gilded surface of a pond, the ruddy glare of late
afternoon on the windows of houses in an neighboring village—-
anything of this sort was enough to make him cheerful for the
rest of the day. How did it happen that this little peasant, whose
parents could not read or write, invariably saw in the sun (like
Saint Athanasius and Saint Patrick centuries before) a symbol of
the Word of God redeeming the human race?
Considering his age there was a great deal of the detachment
and serenity of the saints in Francisco. With all his courage and
fortitude, he was peaceful and gentle by nature, and seemed to
have a precocious sense of how little the mere things of this world
24
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHsR1bc_dmeEXj-OVAH3kTruV1T7g6Jb-ftrkyBdgIyfbxK-edEKtC-Fq_eXnWnljzq-du18FzonF5KSVPOZi4GJ2T4H-GVusDKBeSim99Gl5gbYjdxqr1EdFxOUlGpNTFJx6vTBg=w502-h812-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 25
amount to. He would not put himself to the trouble of fighting
even for what belonged to him. If another boy grabbed his win¬
nings in a game, he would say, “Do you think I care? Keep it.”
One day he went to Lucia’s house and showed her and some
other children a new handkerchief that had been given him. He
was very proud of this, arid with reason, for it was well made
and had a picture of Our Lady embroidered upon it in bright
colors. It passed from hand to hand, amid exclamations. Then,
mysteriously, it vanished. When at length someone discovered
it in the pocket of a certain boy, he insisted that it was his, and
struggled to keep it. Francisco was strong enough to take it from
him by force. Instead, he shrugged. “Keep it, then. What does
a handkerchief matter to me?”
This indifference was his chief defect, in Lucia’s opinion, and
was probably the reason why other children did not care much
to play with him. Lucia sometimes found it so irritating that she
would tell him to sit on a stone and keep quiet. Francisco would
obey without a word. What did he care? He could always enter¬
tain himself. Usually he would take his fife from his pocket and
begin to play softly on it.
He had no real desire to be a shepherd. It was Jacinta who
wanted to do everything that Lucia did. Yet Francisco loved his
little sister more than he did his brother Joao. And because he
preferred her company, he used to second her pleadings with a
persistence foreign to his nature, until Olimpia sharply told him
to hold his peace.
“It doesn’t matter, Mother,” he said quietly. “It was Jacinta
who wanted to go.”
A very different person was the capricious and wilful Jacinta,
so much so, adds Lucia, that no one would ever have suspected
they were brother and sister, had they not resembled each other
so noticeably, with their dark brown eyes, their well-spaced fea¬
tures, their firm comely mouths, the curve of their cheeks. But
in temperament, no. The desires of Francisco were few and easy
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGKJVOalZhOp6vg2EOVfNcit-H3xgRKyPHuT6WDFECeEj23U6zIOknZ2cf2ewkW9GWHYvyKPTvFkZclKkWtJrkmaIhBfP0wyoiU44K84IPdv8MrvJEwFeScnuOxkPBsJdGmdfEi=w491-h810-v0
26 Our Lady of Fatima
to satisfy. Jacinta wanted everything, and with a passionate in¬
sistence. When she made up her mind to be a shepherdess with
Lucia, she gave her mother no rest. Yet Olimpia, too, was a strong
woman.
Jacinta’s dearest ambition was to make her First Communion.
If Lucia had received at six, why not she? Whenever there was a
new Communion class, the older girl would go with her sister
Maria to receive again and to renew her devotion to the hidden
Jesus. On one such occasion they took Jacinta along. She was
enchanted with everything, most of all with the tiny girls who,
attired as angels, fairly showered the Sacred Host with flowers.
The next time they were in the meadows, she made a garland
and placed it on Lucia’s head.
“Why do you do that, Jacinta?”
“I do as the angels do. I give you flowers.”
Jacinta seemed to have reached the pinnacle of happiness when
she was given a place at last among the “angels” in a Corpus
Christi procession. Yet when Lucia and the other girls cast their
offerings at the Host, she was seen to stand still, staring at Father
Pena.
“Jacinta,” asked Maria afterwards, “why didn’t you throw the
flowers at Jesus?”
“Because I didn’t see Plim.”
“You should have done as Lucia did.”
Jacinta said afterwards to Lucia:
“Then you saw the little Jesus?”
“No. But don’t you know that the little Jesus of the Host
Whom we never see is hidden, and that we receive Him in
Communion?”
“And when you receive Communion do you talk with Him?”
“I talk.”
“And why don’t you see Him?”
“Because He is hidden.”
“I am going to ask my mother to let me go to Communion, too!”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH52YsZ9XemcEPQ8znd8AzmzVP1WyYewcjw81p666UInXXNe9wuhAyDvzObz31peE-tDSZt5N904mzgpUzFxRJCzwWdgM9aZwT-pW25qFUxj2kHtlSRQW-z5Dh5Rxk3JmZTKt6Q=w491-h810-v0
27 Our Lady of Fatima
“The Prior won’t let you till you are ten.”
“But you aren’t ten, and you go to Communion.”
“Because I knew all the doctrine, and you don’t know it.”
Thus Lucia became the teacher of a very apt pupil, who was
not content to learn by rote, but wanted to know the reason for
everything.
“How can so many people at the same time receive the little
hidden Jesus?” she would ask. “And how can there be a niece
for each one?”
“Don’t you see that there are many Hosts, and that the Little
One is in each one?” And Lucia tried to explain the mystery of
the multiplication of the body of Him who had multiplied the
loaves and fishes, and had made all things. It was not long, how¬
ever, before she came to the end of her knowledge, and began
to repeat herself.
“Teach us more things,” Jacinta would say, encouragingly, “for
we know all these things now.”
Jacinta managed to persuade her mother that she knew enough
catechism to be examined by the Prior, and Senhora Olimpia
finally took her to the church.
Father Pena asked her a great many questions. At the end he
looked grave and said he feared the child was too young; besides,
she did not know enough doctrine.
Poor Jacinta! How she grieved! Yet it was not her nature to
brood over past defeats when there were other victories to be
gained; and if life brought her some disappointments, they were
soon forgotten. One day she ran to Lucia’s house with great and
evident joy, Francisco following more sedately.
“Guess what? My mother is going to let us tend the sheep!”
It was true, Olimpia had yielded at last. And from then on
Francisco and Jacinta, like Lucia, could be seen early in the morn¬
ing prodding a woolly flock that almost filled the narrow road
—Francisco in his long trousers, with a staff and a tasseled stocking
cap such as the shepherds of the Serra still wear, Jacinta with a
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEwKCqw7xQTw0ENuNtojysT0WobbtiAr5ExaNtefp2NILGqS1msVtcfonzQd5vb-FrqVawxjyC2mv4Tq-MsfHfwh6z0NaKz0acpsxBrAOCbAteptubCCQ5BG6T4L33I_Q3zBs0wCA=w491-h810-v0
gray checked waist and a black skirt that fell to her ankles, and
a kerchief over her dark hair. At the barreiro (mud hole) they
would wait for Lucia, while the sheep nosed into the brackish
water; or if Lucia arrived there first, she would wait for them.
Then the three, all barefoot as a rule, would proceed together
behind the combined flock of some twenty-five or more sheep,
with now and then a goat or two, until they came to some place
where there was good grazing.
Jacinta liked to walk in the midst of the flock. Sometimes she
would pick up one of the smallest and whitest lambs and carry it
wrapped about her neck.
“Why do you do that, Jacinta?”
“To do as Our Lord does,” she replied, referring to a holy
picture someone had given her, with an image of the Good
Shepherd on it. But when they reached their destination in some
pasture, she was ready for any sort of game or frolic.
Sometimes they would spend the whole day at Cova da Iria.
Sometimes they would play at Valinhos. Their favorite place was
the rock-strewn hill called Cabego, where the cave on the prop¬
erty of Lucia’s godfather Anastasio offered so many opportunities
for fun, and so extensive and beautiful a view.
Jacinta never tired of chasing the small white butterflies that
flitted all day in the warm sweet air on the hillside and along the
ridge. If there was anything she liked better than that, it was
to pick the wild flowers that grew in great variety and profusion
among the scattered rocks. There was a small blossom of brilliant
blue that dotted the fields everywhere about Cabego, and it was
not difficult to find wild mint, because it was so fragrant, particu¬
larly if it had been crushed by some passing foot. Indeed, there
were so many delightful odors combined and flung across the
valley by the strong west wind, that it was hard to say just what
they were. One could usually distinguish, even above the scent
of mint or the aroma from the tall pines in the deep valley below,
the more pungent fragrance of a dwarf variety of wild rosemary
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGOoT4q1MqMXmZj7LQmgFEey4jpI9Z-yu5jAif7JfuvC4RjFKJXWs4tEKXiMISCCfvxXUp6QZGM0_xyTuRIYr8SKnRc7ZfnEU1AlmaAyzJBbGJbXv1BdFP3tQssWThGi_ALP-op=w491-h810-v0
that the Portuguese call the alecrim. They have a popular song
about it that recalls the “rosemary—that’s for remembrance” of
Ophelia:
“Quern pelo alecrim passou
E um raminho nao tirou.
Do sen amor se nao lemhrou.” 1
Rose of the sea—Mary’s rose—rose of Mary, star of the sea—
this humble variety of rosemary still grows everywhere about
Cabefo, as if in memory of Jacinta.
Like all children she was fascinated by the discovery of the
echo; and as the echoes at Cabejo happen to be very clear, loud’
and deliberate, she and her companions would shout for an hour
at a time across the rustling crests of the pines, and listen with
delight for the slow return of their voices from the opposite hill.
All kinds of names, jingles and jibbensh passed and repassed by
that mysterious agency that the Greeks imagined to be a nymph.
But Jacinta was especially fond of the repercussions of the word
“Maria.” Sometimes she would say the whole Ave Maria, pro¬
nouncing each word only after the previous one had stopped re¬
verberating:
“Ave . . . Maria . . . cheia . . . de grapa . . . /”
Sometimes all three would join in this sport, and then it seemed
as if the whole Serra da Aire resounded with the words spoken
by Gabriel two thousand years ago:
“Blessed ... art .. . thou . . . among . . . women!”
What Jacinta liked best of all, however, was to dance. She was.
very graceful, and she knew it; nothing seemed to satisfy the
restless energy of her* mind and body so much as flinging her arms
and legs about in time to music. Lucia liked it well enough, but
not with the tireless inebriation that seemed to possess the younger
-1— 1 “He who will pass the alecrim
And does not stop to pluck a sprig.
Will not be mindful of his love.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFGc4PWZOjSYj6P_9qY5Gz-6YnBcN-8V2uU9SGQJxj2qEiQh7GZofHuNjwc6X5BMw8MbcHm2B0RCc5KwNnL2jy75jxmR93g9TfhEx6YAUujrCkAI5axjJub9mDTbRdZ_6jlI-LqPQ=w491-h810-v0
3°
girl. As for Francisco, he cared nothing for it. Yet, because he
loved music, and because he enjoyed seeing the girls dance, he
would sit for hours on a stone playing one tune after another on
his pipe, while they tripped barefoot on the parched clay or the
trampled grass. Some of the profaner songs may have been sung
in those mountains since Roman times. Others were holy, for the
Portuguese shepherds, like those of France, have quite a repertory
of Catholic songs inherited from the Middle Ages. Francisco’s
favorite was one called Amo a Deus no Ceu, which went thus:
“I love God in heaven,
I love Fdim on earth,
I love the field, the flowers,
I love the mountain sheep.
Like my little lambs,
I learn to jump.
I am the joy of the serra,
I am the lily of the valley.
I am a poor shepherd girl,
I pray to Mary always.
In the middle of my flock
I am the midday sun.
O’ i 6 ai!
Who will let me see Thee?
O’ i 6 ai!
My Jesus, now, this moment?” 2
One of. Jacinta’s favorites was an old hymn:
“Hail, noble Patron,
Thy people’s favorite,
Chosen among all,
As the people of the Lord.
2 De Marchi, p. 47. Lucia gives a slightly different version in Memoir IV, pp. 4—5.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEYOUl2jd8GKl5Q0TQVJJbHmQA1pVPzbrVfMcRb0kIIX44pgHmcv8GFV97gfj_su5B6wy892p32RJlTwom_DuzdFsA4PUkYE4eBEkfgXnL-w8YsLs4xGKTELnQY28q0UDBGItKb5A=w491-h810-v0
31
O glory o£ our land
Saved by thee a thousand times,
To all true Portuguese
Thou art their love,
Their love!
O angels, sing with me!
O angels, sing forever.
I can’t give thanks as you can,
Angels, give them for me,
Give them for me!
O Jesus, what tender Jove!
O Jesus, what love is thine?
Leave the heavenly throne,
Come make a heaven on earth,
A heaven on earth!”
There was another one that went,
“In heaven, in heaven, in heaven
I shall be with my Mother . . .
Virgin pure, your tenderness
Is the solace of my pain;
Night and day I shall sing
The beauty of Mary!”
There was nothing of self-conscious piety in the impulse of
these children to sing songs about Christ and Our Lady, heaven
and the angels. Christianity for them was not like a garment to
be put on on Sundays. It was like the air they breathed, it v/as a
part, and the most important part, of reality. And because they
knew that all things v/ere the creatures of God, they turned just
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH2-msJ35cAOYyeSixyB6LUJsUwwiQ_N_xaFRqa2n_nY9Si1E_pMvz34LdiPYuhkCg0lIThOidX6b3HvPtyMFni2Y8C4SEXBDrMcn3ThHTQjIi44LvJQ3UxMBfHIRuKFLyW2mLwiQ=w491-h810-v0
as naturally from time to time to more secular and even profane
songs “of which unhappily,” wrote Lucia, “we knew plenty.”
There was this rather cryptic one, for instance! /
“Pretty almond tree,
What blossoming have you?
It was on your account
I lost my good name.
I have a bad name now—
Let it go!
I am going to wash
In rose water.
I am going to gild
The green lemon!
Singing is lovely,
Weening is no good.”
There was a rollicking spring song to which it was great fun
to dance:
“Don’t sing the ah la la, o spring, o spring!
The ah la la is all over, how nice, how nice!
Because of the ah la la, o spring, o spring!
My mother punished me, how nice, how nice!
Ah la la . . .
Ah la la . . .
In this life everything sings, o spring, o spring!
As if to challenge me, how nice, how nice!
The spring sings on the serra, o spring, o spring!
And the laundress at the river, how nice, how nice!
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFqpm4WtjvjpPZnlpDgBC0RfAapOBx7uzAMiTYb65LHbn_VdG6T_M-0kG26VUVhQ4EQKpK_7lr-ODiYNgS18vFm-1FbvyVgbiY4miirt3A_WBw-Xe73bdfG02zxRylZ0aAtKmVikQ=w491-h810-v0
33 Our Lady of Fatima
Ah la la . . .
Ah la la . . .
At night the screech-owl sings, o spring, o spring!
He tries to frighten me, how nice, how nice!
The girl as she disrobes, o spring, o spring!
Sings songs to the moon, how nice, how nice!
Ah la la . . .
Ah la la . . .
The nightingale in the Held, o spring, o spring!
Sings all day long, how nice, how nice!
The turtle dove sings in the wood, o spring, o spring!
The squeaking wagon sings, how nice, how nice!
Ah la la . . .
Ah la la . . .
Another fine old song was called A Serrana:
“Mountain girl, mountain girl,
With chestnut eyes,
Who gave you, mountain girl,
Such lovely charms?
Such lovely charms,
I never saw the like!
Have pity on me.
Have pity on me,
Serrana, serrana,
Have pity on me!”
When they tired of singing they would play various games. They
were getting rather big now for “Button, button,” or “Pass the
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHOFg0wUbeHOi-NK0Cdx86iWpTZQQjziUnBuzZX3c8OrLeeOYcveceDNX87OM1srrGvbiY5oEF4sQkk-o-QuJ7Ol7QdUf_YIRZuFqudL-o8TvWnRc_OT1oKT8bXkOgH0RuGFHjtXQ=w491-h810-v0
34 Our Lady of Fatima
ring”; but it was more fun to pitch quoits. As for cards, they
always carried two packs along, one belonging to Lucia’s family,
the other to the Martos. Among the best games with these were
“dressing the queens,” and “sobering up the kings.” There was
another, that Lucia liked, called bisca.
After their merenda, or afternoon snack, they were in the habit
of kneeling wherever they happened to be and saying the Rosary.
Maria Rosa had instructed Lucia to do this; but without her watch¬
ful supervision they were beginning to gloss over parts of it until
they had reduced it to a perfunctory recital, in which the medita¬
tion intended to be part of the devotion had very little share, and
nothing remained of the words but the first two of each prayer:
“Hail, Mary . . . Hail Mary . . . Hail, Mary;” and “Our
Father.” Living in the presence of God in all innocence, and seeing
in everything about them the work of His hands and the evi¬
dence of His goodness and power, these three young shepherds
must have seemed neither better nor worse than most other urchins
of the Serra, and ordinary Catholic children everywhere, when
their bucolic routine was first interrupted, in the summer of 1916,
by a tremendous and unpredictable experience.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFGnwjdlf6n-E08SVg1cFOKpsWC3TjBebsSEVe7HXuozCB7YstniS9lqNtcspHL7Eg43Rku9RHtc8Gw4PutAbysVFH-jvRPo_dZx6ogxmnAAxiG1OUhVh8HSq6YN87DKnyEztUIvg=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER IV
The Serra da Aire had felt very little, thus far, of the misery
and despair that had settled over Europe in the spring of 1516.
In such remote and inaccessible places life generally pursues its
own serene course though armies clash and kingdoms come toppling
down. Ti Marto, for example, had felt a natural shock of indigna¬
tion when King Carlos was assassinated in 1908, and he had
never expected much of the liberal Republic of 1910, for he knew
the anti-Christian principles and associations of its founders. Yet a
true peasant is more interested in the amount of rainfall and the
price of wool than in the identity of his rulers in some city many
miles away. It was said that the Republic had seized church prop¬
erty, exiled hundreds of nuns, priests, and even the Cardinal
Patriarch of Lisboa and other bishops. But the people of Aljustrel
still had their good priest at Fatima, and could hear Mass every
Sunday. It is doubtful if they realized the harm that had been
done to the Church in other parts of the country, particularly
in the cities.
It was very much the same when Portugal formally entered the
World War in March, 1916. Only a few days previously Pope
Benedict XV had made one of his most moving appeals for peace.
He had begged all men of good will to have recourse to prayer
and mortification rather than hatred, and had warned of the ruin
that would come to all Europe if his words were not heeded. Yet
with this memorable utterance still reverberating throughout the
world, the unchristian rulers of that little Christian country—-
Christian at least, in history and tradition, and in country places
like the Serra da Aire—had taken the decisive step, preferring to
follow the voice of England rather than the Pope’s; and Portugal
was now openly at war. Still, outside of the newspaper propa-
35
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHss8I_g-5lJYybfE-KzvrNGiloW1d2WauQCEaceQbr5ydtPjtT1paTogY6FlXOnRAdX0F0IBTr4TAg47aDjF622cRBCNzojHP3q3lITC2-hR_Cj4k2eqi_mSU9iOHZqcy2sJ_u=w491-h810-v0
ganda from near-by cities there was little evidence of the change
in places like Aljustrel. For it was planting time there, and every¬
thing seemed hopeful and cheerful as the sun grew warmer, and
the fields turned from reddish brown to green. Lucia, Francisco
and Jacinta followed their sheep as usual over the savory hills,
watched the rebirth of the world, and sang and danced among
the rocks.
Thus passed the spring, and it was summer again. But nothing
very notable occurred until one fine clear warm day, when they
met according to their custom and guided their flocks slowly toward
a place known as Couza Velha, a little west of Aljustrel. For some
time the sheep nibbled at the new grass on a field there belonging
to Lucia’s father, while the children played various games near by.
They were still amusing themselves, in the middle of the morn¬
ing, when the sky became suddenly overcast, and a fine mist
scudded quickly down on one of those stiff, cold breezes from the
invisible ocean to the northwest. They remembered the half-cave
at Cabe^o, near the rocky crest of the slope on which the sheep
were grazing; and as quickly as possible they prodded them up
the gradual incline until, seeing them huddled peacefully in the
shelter of some trees, they themselves took refuge in the “cave”
on the southern brow of the hill.
It is not much of a cave, to tell the truth, for only a little bit
of it is roofed. Still, there is enough of a pitch in the great rock
that slants upward from the small hollow to give shelter from
any light rain or heavy blow from the north or northwest. At
any rate, it was the best to be found, and the three continued
their games there as gaily as before. After a while they became
hungry and ate their lunch. Then they knelt and recited the
Rosary. Lucia does not remember whether they said all of it, or
merely the skeletonized, “Hail Mary . . . Our Father.” She does
recall, however, that when they had finished, the rain stopped as
suddenly as it had begun, and presently the sun was shining again,
fierce and white, in a serene sky. She and the others began to
throw stones into the valley below.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQElXe3Z_WX4I5KWEIqmH9nPpXdtiYBDwZxiACGtQK1-6XqN_mRgz8RV8ORW9Km_Sd7SqNIy8IMF2wg6o_C1Whnk_9JZoeT_O5q_4aLnDH3O9nUI9ByB13SaWriFP874iD0RJM3I8Q=w491-h810-v0
They had enjoyed this sport only a few moments when, with¬
out warning, a strong wind began to blow across the tops of the
pines, which swayed and moaned as never before. Startled by this,
the three left off casting stones, and looked about to see what
the cause might be. Then they saw a light far over the tops of
the trees. It was moving over the valley from east to west, and
coming in their' direction. And though the illumination itself
was unlike any they had ever seen, Lucia recognized in it the
strange whiteness of that “somebody wrapped in a sheet” that
she had witnessed the previous year with the three other girls. It
seemed indeed to be wholly made up of a radiance more white
than snow; and this time it drew so near that when it was just
over a squarish rock at the entrance of the “cave,” it became dis¬
tinguishable as the form of “a transparent young man” of about
fourteen or fifteen years of age, “more brilliant than a crystal, pene¬
trated by the rays of the sun,” as Lucia describes it—or “like snow
that the sun shines through until it becomes crystalline.” And
now they could see that he had features like those of a human
being, and was indescribably beautiful.
Stupefied, speechless, they stood regarding him.
“Don’t be afraid,” he said. “I am the Angel of Peace. Pray
with me.”
And kneeling on the ground, he prostrated himself until his
forehead touched it, saying:
“My God, I believe, I adore, I hope, and I love You! I beg
pardon of You for those who do not believe, do not adore, do
not hope and do not love You!” 1
1 This is a literal translation of the words as Lucia gives them: "Mcu Deus! Eu
creio, adoro, espero e amo-vos; pego-vos perddo para os que ndo creem ndo adoram
ndo esperam e vos ndo amam."—Memoir II, pp. io-ii. Her two descriptions of the
angel are substantially the same: "Sc aproximava iamos divisando as feigoes, um jovem
dos 140 15 anos, mats branco que se fora de neve, que o Sol tornava transparente como
se fora de cristal e duma grande beleza.”—Memoir II, p. 10, 1937. And, "A alguma
distancia sobre as drvores que se estendian ao direccao no nascente, uma luz mais
branca que a neve, com a forma dum jovem transparente, mais brilhante que um
cristal atravesado pelos raios do Sol. A medida que se aproximava, tamos-lhe dis-
tinguindo as feigoes."—Memoir IV, p. 31, December 8, 1941.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGOWSP6Qq9vbYcDo-xcS7ev22FZxrSFUPcUufl9tQ8D1sNf1498OSD7TP5HvVIoslbw-PwyMVuyONpnvOlrfwxSv5TtuPQJtz0m3hXyvojYBXAuRv-eEhvLIM07zoUUPPkPPZM2Ig=w491-h810-v0
Three times he spoke the same words, while the children, as in
a daze, repeated them after him. Then, arising he said:
“Pray thus. The hearts of Jesus and Mary are attentive to the
voice of your supplications.”
With that he disappeared, as if he had been dissolved in sun¬
light.
The children remained kneeling for a long time under the
influence perhaps of some supernatural state of ecstacy or suspension
of bodily powers, such as many saints have described. “It was so
intense,” wrote Lucia, “that we were almost unaware of our own
existence for a long space of time.” They kept saying the Angel’s
prayer over and over. Not that there was any danger of forgetting
it, for the words had been impressed indelibly upon their minds;
but it seemed the only thing to do.
“My God, I believe, I adore, I hope, and I love You! I beg pardon
of You for those who do not believe, do not adore, do not hope, and
do not love You.”
Lucia and Jacinta were still kneeling and repeating these words,
when they became aware of the voice of Francisco:
“I can’t stay this way as long as you can, it hurts my back so much
I can’t do it.”
He had stopped kneeling and was sitting on the ground,
exhausted. All of them, in fact, felt weak and dazed. Gradually
they pulled themselves together and then began to collect the
scattered sheep, for the day was far spent and it was nearly time for
supper. None of them felt like talking on the way to Aljustrel.
Just before they parted, Lucia warned the others to say nothing
of what they had seen and heard. Why she did this she does not
know even to this day. “It seemsd the right thing to do,” she
told me. “There was something intensely intimate about it. It
was just something you couldn’t talk about.”
The Angel of Peace! Who and what could he be? There are
angels and angels, there are ranks and hierarchies of angels; and it
is nothing new, in the long history of God’s People for one of them
to appear and to speak. No one with the gift of faith can doubt that
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHYdZXQSMXefSqY4mOFGOtgOXFgI7NhsPK0QTgJ96e7zJq2aA4JqiQcS24eyZ1dtqS4aqmEKpQ51amZwZfaSnecgguWkJ6QJH7YZs3GuUkoHtlZq1tMVYVGAXwIZkv7al634CnkDA=w491-h810-v0
39 Our Lady of Fatima
the Archangel Raphael guided young Tobias; he is the angel of
health, of joy, of happy lovers, of safe travelers. Or that Gabriel
told Daniel the time of the Incarnation, and announced to Mary
that she was to be the Mother of the Christ; Gabriel, the spirit of
consolation, the Power of God. It is to the Archangel Michael,
however, that Catholic liturgy applies the name of Angel of Peace—
Angelus pads Michael.2 Yet in keeping with the paradoxical nature
of all things Christian, he is also the heavenly warrior, armed with
a fiery brand, chief of that
embattled flaming multitude
Who rise, wing above wing, flame above flame,
And like a storm, cry the Ineffable Name,
And with the clashing of their sword-blades make
A rapturous music, till the morning break,
And the white hush end all but the loud beat
Of their long wings, the flash of their white feet.3
He it was who at the dawn of time cast down the disobedient
hosts of Lucifer. It was he who stood by the closed gates of Eden,
brandishing his flaming sword. He guards the body of Eve until
the Judgment Day. He hid the body of Moses to save God’s
People from the sin of worshiping it, to which Satan incited them.
Some say it was he who led the Hebrews to the Promised Land and
shattered the host of Sennacherib. Always the protector of the
Synagogue under the Old Law, he naturally became the champion
of God’s People under the New. Many apparitions have been
recorded of him besides the one in Cornwall that Milton refers to
in Lycidas. In the fifth century, for instance, Saint Gregory the
Great saw him sheathing his fiery blade on top of Hadrian’s Tomb
in Rome, as a sign that God had accepted the penance of the
2 Roman Breviary, Hymn for Lauds on his feast of September 29:
"Angelus pads Michael in aedes
Coelitus nostras veniat; serenae
Auctor ut pads lacrymosa in orcum
Bello releget."
8 Yeats: To Some I Have Talked With by the Fire.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHYicbul5NZFGkt7ZyfLBGaXxwkvZ95oSJ2w7VzJZNsvxfueXfQUKRapTlz0vwpEWDmF2nSGV39SIbnlFfEscA-IAjrHQF0IsI8jizKLgAulA5XAWn_sWV7dPDdZx-bWXTFsv5Vlw=w491-h810-v0
4° Our Lady of Fatima
Romans, and would end the pestilence that scourged them for their
sins; and many angel voices were heard about the image of Our
Lady, which the holy Pope bore at the head of the procession.
Finally, it is Michael, according to Saint John in the Apocalypse,
who will deal out final and everlasting death to the Dragon at the
end of time, after those days in which men shall behold in heaven
“A woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and
on her head a crown of twelve stars.”
Whether it was splendid Michael that the children saw at
Cabejo, or one of the other six who stand before the throne of God,
the effect upon them was profound and lasting. The world could
never be the same after such an experience. But this was not all.
For the Angel appeared again to them, not merely once, but twice.
The second apparition was a few weeks after the first. It was one
of the hottest days of that summer. They had taken their sheep
home at noon to inclose them during the blazing hours of the
siesta, and were spending the time playing listlessly at the well in
the shade of the fig trees behind the Abobora cottage, apparently
with no thought of what was about to happen, when they looked up
and saw him there beside them.
“What are you doing?” he demanded. “Pray! Pray a great deal!
The hearts of Jesus and of Mary have merciful designs for you.
Offer prayers and sacrifices constantly to the Most High.”
“How must we sacrifice?” asked Lucia.
“With all your power offer a sacrifice as an act of reparation
for the sinners by whom He is offended, and of supplication for
the conversion of sinners. Thus draw peace upon your country. I
am its Guardian Angel, the Angel of Portugal. Above all accept
and endure with submission the suffering which the Lord will send ” 4 you.
4 The exact words, as Lucia recorded them were: “De tudo que podeis, oferecei
um sqcrificio em acto de reparacao pelos pecadores com que Ele e ofendido e de
suplica pela donversao dos pecadores. Atrai assim sobre a vossa Patria a paz. Eu sou o
Anjo da sua guarda, o Anjo de Portugal. Sobretudo aceitai e suportai com submissdo
o sofrimento que o Senhor vos enviar.”—Memoir IV, p. 32.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGi79RLgZ07ro38hiU-trFK0bniCRV0l4Ez-Z2OCk_vk-QDBWqGhZyTsWTk-IxnFINejIm5hKYAB84-AHBL0Th4HuRLFIzzivZhIUk9SHoGKqQr_7IN7yqtKH4fQeccu-vvulA2yQ=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 41
He was gone. And again the children remained for a long time in
a sort of ecstacy or exultation of spirit, adoring the Lord God whose
messenger had been revealed to them. When this gradually fell
away and they began to feel more like their ordinary selves, Lucia
discovered that Francisco had heard nothing of what the Angel
had said, although, as before, he had seen him plainly.
“Did you speak with the Angel?” he asked. “What did he say to
you?”
“Didn’t you hear?”
“No. I saw that you were speaking with somebody. I heard what
you said to him, but I don’t know what he said.”
The next day Francisco said to his sister:
“Jacinta, tell me what the Angel said.”
“I’ll tell you tomorrow,” said the little girl. “Today I can’t
speak.”
On the following day he sought out Lucia again and said:
“Did you sleep last night? I was thinking all the time of the
Angel and what it might be he said.”
She then repeated the Angel’s words on both occasions. The boy’s
mind was slower than Jacinta’s. He had difficulty grasping what
some of it meant.
“Who is the Most High?” he asked. “What does it mean, ‘The
hearts of Jesus and Mary are attentive to the voice of your
supplications’?”
Lucia tried to explain. It was not easy, for he would break in
constantly with other questions. Besides, the weight of what she calls
“the atmosphere of the supernatural” was still to some extent upon
them both, even after so long a time. She could not think of what to
say. Finally she said, “Some other day! Ask me some other
day!”
He waited patiently, but at the first opportunity he began plying
her with new questions.
“Don’t talk much about these things!” interrupted Jacinta. Yet
with charming inconsistency she went on to say that there was
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGi9SNpGWJtch4KR8AKYE1M8KE7AASmYj2C2hEchTXNOo9Xp-r_rFEo7icOs_5A_RZdaKlrgmc7VqsXDHfOUHvqxrKITKA5gPTlSu64_r5BoH8JsNMoc4v-nCSqVgFoW5NdkzSqpQ=w491-h810-v0
something about the Angel that made her no longer want to talk,
sing or play. “I haven’t strength enough for anything.”
“Neither have I,” said Francisco. “But what of it? The Angel is
more beautiful than all this. Let us think about him!”
Presently he did begin to grasp what the Angel had meant by
sacrifices. From that day forth he vied with the girls in giving up
little pleasures and satisfactions for the sinners of the world. All
three would spend hours at a time lying prostrate on the ground,
repeating over and over the prayer that the Angel had taught.
This must have been in July or August, 1916. As nearly as Lucia
can estimate, it was probably late September or October when
he appeared for the third and last time. Again they had been playing
in the “cave” at Cabego, while the sheep strayed on the slope below;
and after saying their Rosary as usual, they were reciting the prayer
in unison:
“My God, I believe, I adore, I hope, and I love You. I beg pardon
of You for those who do not believe, do not adore, do not hope, and
do not love You.”
They had said this but a few times when they saw the same
crystalline light come swiftly over the valley, and there he was,
beautiful, resplendent, dazzling, hovering in the air before them.
This time he held in one hand a Chalice, and in the other, over it,
a Host. These he left suspended in the air while he prostrated
himself on the ground and said:
“Most Holy Trinity, Father, Son, Holy Spirit, I adore You
profoundly and offer You the most precious Body, Blood, Soul and
Divinity of Jesus Christ, present in all the tabernacles of the earth,
in reparation for the outrages, sacrileges, and indifference with which
He Himself is offended. And through the infinite merits of His
Most Sacred Heart and of the Immaculate Heart of Mary, I beg of
You the conversion of poor sinners.”
This he said three times. Then, rising up, he took the Chalice
and the Host, and kneeling on the flat rock, held the white disk
before him, saying:
“Take and drink the Body and the Blood of Jesus Christ,
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGibe9QgpuCSeLjJH-QDAXR-Kc-seHPsBbWx8G7Y5ipUIh_poParob1OTfGe1Pyf_NyJp1jq5hxUfVcnio8fT-n3_lNB7fST7pwzZeGErBIBNIUvp2Y0i9MkHHOnOCHcwJlAXLMbw=w491-h810-v0
horribly insulted by ungrateful men. Make reparation for their
crimes and console your God.”
They could see drops of Blood falling from the Host into the Cup.
He placed It on the tongue of Lucia. To Jacinta and Francisco,
who had notvreceived First Communion, he presented the Chalice,
and they drank of it. At the end he once more prostrated himself
on the ground and said the same prayer thrice. The children
repeated it with him, Francisco following the others, for he had not
heard the words. Then, for the last time, the Angel of Peace faded
away into the shimmering sunlight.
The sense of the presence of God on that occasion was so intense,
according to Lucia, that it left them weak and abstracted and almost
with the sensation of being out of their bodies. It was Francisco,
again, who was the first to return to ordinary reality, and to call
their attention to the fact that it was growing dark. With such
energy as they could muster, they herded the sheep together and
drove them home. Yet under their weakness they felt an infinite
peace and felicity for which there were no words.
This curious sense of happy debility lasted for days and weeks.
It was a long time before Francisco would venture to speak of what
he had seen and felt. Finally he said:
“I like very much to see the Angel, but the worst of it is that
afterwards we can’t do anything. I can’t even walk. I don’t know
what’s the matter with me.”
A few days later, when he had recovered his normal energy
and spirit, he said:
“The Angel gave you Holy Communion. But what was it
that he gave me and Jacinta?”
“It was also Holy Communion,” put in Jacinta before Lucia
could reply. “Didn’t you see that it was the Blood that fell from
the Host?”
“I felt that God was in me,” he said, “but I didn’t know how
it was.”
Then prostrating himself on the ground, he remained there a
long time, repeating the second prayer of the Angel:
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG6npuTJ9GfWix2JmsP9kUBBg_Ik8MjecQGuawTOFSxkw12DRCPGR3L8OgYVmKDTOZnhvACC6HBgMCxWXCyqXaOGJsPkNnObkK4M-UTUnWo5E8OgBA-Npmi3Xp1NAo7Oes0etKUhw=w491-h810-v0
“Most Holy Trinity, Father, Son, Holy Spirit, I adore You
profoundly and offer You the most precious Body, Blood, Soul
and Divinity of Jesus Christ, present in all the tabernacles of
the earth, in reparation for the outrages, sacrileges and indiffer¬
ence with which He Himself is offended. And through the in¬
finite merits of His Most Sacred Heart and of the Immaculate
Heart of Mary, I beg of You the conversion of poor sinners.”
Such is Lucia’s account of what happened to her and her cousins
when she was nine, and they were eight and six respectively.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGUwVj5FEod6BROPHHDE5kAFUhV-2tV3_JMlTrt8d4lQFhkwHiHMiIUh6yxWohzVhVFxMmQ_zJbFfsUknQhRAT-T3gZi1PIQ-Qmw2JPJ8Cle4gafvOqgxUMp3L5qynO6pcur6m2Zw=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER V
None of the children ever mentioned the Angel either at home
or elsewhere. This became credible to me only after I had gone to
Portugal and had spoken with some of the young shepherds who
now, at about the same age, go barefoot among the sheep on the
Serra da Aire. These short, stocky boys, with their fine eyes and
strong flashing teeth, these handsome girls, so straight and shapely,
are more precocious than those we know, and are not to be judged
by the same standards. Early responsibility has made them resource¬
ful, fearless, and decisive in judgment and expression. 1 hough
their formal knowledge is limited, for few can read or write, their
brains are not cluttered, at any rate, with misinformation and scraps
of half-truths; what they do know they know thoroughly, remem¬
ber exactly, and can speak without hesitation or fumbling. A
barefoot girl of five or six will reply with grace and dignity. Or
if she sees fit she can be as silent as a sphinx.
Lucia, even more than most of these serranas, was endowed with
a reserve so extreme that it was often mistaken for stubbornness
or stupidity. It was easier for her to hold her counsel than to talk.
Moreover, she had not forgotten the petty persecution she had
endured after she and the Matias and Justino girls had seen “some¬
one wrapped in a sheet.” If her own mother and sisters had made
fun of that, who would believe now that an Angel had come to
give her Holy Communion?
Finally, there was something in the experience itself that imposed
silence in a subtle but powerful way. Lucia was never able to
put this into fitting words, either in childhood or in the years
of her memoirs. Yet there it was: an ineffable something which
could only be of God, impressing the words of the Angel upon
45
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG96nDWFPmEupV2yG3ZMHWLELHA3szkw_uUSFwncP8iGDElH_HzLcGF6GXclLv9VexoMvDa1g4jt4VLE0CdpOZmW8tkY2wVehWTlpGd-ZDtvZhl5Wmz8WCso2bofageXjPRn2eZDg=w491-h810-v0
their minds forever, but secretly, in a voice of authority not to
be disobeyed.
Their elders seem to have been wholly unaware of what had
been going on. What is more lonely and misunderstood than the
heart of a child? No doubt these good people of Aljustrel were
too busy with their own affairs to notice anything unusual in the
conduct of three young shepherds who departed with their flocks
early in the morning and were seen no more until they returned
for supper. It happened, too, that there were many changes about
this time in the life of the small communities on the Serra. One
that vividly impressed Lucia’s family, for example, was the de¬
parture of the Prior, Father Pena, and the arrival of a somewhat
more austere priest, Father Boicinha, as his successor. There were
the usual gossipings, the usual appraisals of the newcomer, pro
and con. The more thoughtful parishioners must have felt that
they were lucky to have any pastor at all, when so many com¬
munities in Portugal |iad none. Others gave no quarter: any
pastor, good or bad, was fair game for them.
Father Boicinha was one who spoke truth fearlessly as he saw it.
One of his first acts, and one that made him unpopular with the
young people, was to preach against the inveterate dancing which
commanded almost a pagan and fanatical devotion throughout
the Serra da Aire. Dancing at home, yes, that was all right, he
granted; but those all-night public affairs at Fatima and other
villages were keeping people from going to Mass, leading them
into sin, and in general becoming a scandal; and he declared that
they must stop. There v/ere many protests and murmunngs, of
course, especially among fhe girls. Maria Rosa, however, sup¬
ported the Paroco, and forbade her daughters to attend any more
dances.
“But dancing never was a sin till now,” objected a neighbor,
“and how does it happen that this new Paroco makes it one?”
“I don’t know,” replied Maria Rosa. “All I know is that the
Prior doesn’t want dancing, and my daughters aren’t going to
those gatherings.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGuKCs-jssx2GSjl-crVURkFSi8MUGFyEH0dvZVmzMNQWGqkj2L9CsIENXQUa6FvzoK4PTHJ0aaayE9-CLYCap8_J7FZ0Kx8DM2t-hM08Vc5QYQzHELElonxp4uk6SZdl7Y8AKkkA=w491-h810-v0
47 Our Lady of Fatima
Life was difficult for Maria Rosa that year. Her two oldest
girls, Maria and Teresa, were married, and could no longer help
the family. Her husband Antonio Abobora seemed to be getting
more and more shiftless. From time to time he had disposed of
some piece of land to pay his debts, or, had lost some valuable
property that he had mortgaged, until there was hardly enough
left for the once prosperous family to live on. To make ends
meet, his wife now felt obliged to send Glona and Caroline out
to work as servants, while she herself continued to care for the
house, and, whenever possible, to earn a little extra money by
nursing. Lucia, of course, was the guardian of the sheep. Nearly
all the farm work was devolving upon young Manuel, and it was
not to his taste. Why should he like it, when his father shirked
it at every opportunity?
The war offered this lad a good excuse to avoid the drudgery of
spading and threshing, cutting hay and digging batatas. Portugal
by this time was deeply involved. Every day one heard of some
young man who was leaving for the front, or worse still, of this
one killed, that one maimed, such a one missing. Something of
the sense of uneasiness and apprehension that had become a
settled despair in other countries was beginning to pervade the
clear air of the Serra. But Manuel was young, strong and hopeful.
And one evening he came home with the news that he had
offered himself for service in the army, and would be accepted
if he passed the physical examination.
From that time a mood of profound bitterness took possession
of Maria Rosa. With the four oldest girls away, and her husband
almost always late as he lingered in some wineshop for one more
copozinbo, the once happy family group had dwindled to four
sad and silent persons. One night when the poor woman looked
about the table at young Antonio, Lucia and Manuel—and now
Manuel was going away!—she stared a moment at the empty
places, and suddenly burst into tears. Then, with intense sadness,
she said:
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG_hQ6CVDHrN75pfVe_E6liV2wgxg-MDPlrzMpl8XN8Ma6g-7EpJGSbuZ9zPVnolDpZlcng3pqKBIxhyG6boUIinrzPD37J7uMfwfbjYA4sWOP_9EpAu-ujvMF9jVTagJH2ZDR4=w491-h810-v0
48 Our Lady of Fatima
her head on the rude table, she wept bitterly, until Manuel and
his sister could not help doing likewise. “It was the saddest
supper I ever remember,” wrote Lucia.
Maria Rosa continued to fret and to grieve. Manuel passed his
physical examination and was accepted. Before it was time for him
to leave home, his mother had become ill, and was getting worse
every day. She had recourse to a doctor in a near-by village, but with
no benefit. As the days passed she became so wretched that she
could no longer do housework, and Gloria had to give up her
employment and come home to take care of the family. Other
medicos about the countryside were consulted. None seemeef to
know just what ailed Maria Rosa.
Father Boicinha, who had been noticing her debility with in¬
creasing concern, now offered to take her to Leiria, the nearest
large community, to visit a surgeon who was reputed to be very
skilful. One day the good priest arrived at the door in his mule
cart, and Maria Rosa, with his help, climbed laboriously aboard,
while one of her married daughters, Teresa, went along to take
care of her. It was a long and painful journey in that crude con¬
veyance, for the winding and rocky roads that skirted the moun¬
tainsides were not nearly as good as they are now. At last, how¬
ever, they had left behind the stately old abbey church of Batalha
and had come in sight of the ruins of that fourteenth-century
castle, perched on a high rock far above the plain, where Saint
Isabel once prayed and suffered—for she too, like Maria Rosa, had
a troublesome husband. Somewhere among the white houses with
red tile roofs that nestle around the base of the crag they found
the noted surgeon. But his examination proved more harrowing
than helpful, and Lucia’s mother arrived home that night half
dead from his ministrations and from the long jogging over bad
roads.
It was from another surgeon at San Mamede that she learned the
truth at last. He said she had a cardiac lesion, a dislocated spinal
vertebra, and fallen kidneys. He prescribed a vigorous treatment of
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQETI7PmJ80NKRLBUJmoXjS6NVnOaET40Rn0OXQ3yDvX1xoOy2i4oT3kKgpfhoAZDQcQ_icbw7CxdcbkFRtJzewWtoZoMbpzodnbTB0EUoZkAWEfJNi-irr9MirLlRgQKHvCXd5mrw=w491-h810-v0
pontas de fogo and various medications. Poor Maria Rosa was like
the woman in the Gospel who had “suffered much from many
physicians.”
Lucia thought a great deal those days of the Angel of Peace and
what he had said. It became her greatest consolation, in fact, to
remember the words, “Above all accept and endure with submis¬
sion the suffering which the Lord will send you,” and to ponder
on their implications. Well, she was certainly seeing the fulfill¬
ment of that prophecy! But patience! She must be brave, she must
accept this suffering. When she could think of nothing to do for
her mother, she would go out to the well to pray and weep alone.
Sometimes Francisco and Jacinta would join her there, and add
their tears and prayers to hers. It is doubtful whether they knew
all that went on in the Abobora family. Yet they must have heard
enough to feel sure that something was very wrong, and their
generous hearts reached out in compassion to Lucia’s. Even Jacinta,
young though she might be, was beginning to grasp the meaning
of the mystery of suffering, and often she would say:
“My God, we offer you all these sufferings and sacrifices! It is
an act of reparation for the conversion of sinners.”
They were more silent and sombre than they used to be, these
little shepherds, when they followed their flocks over the gorse
and stubble of the Serra in the spring of 1917. Sometimes, to be
sure, they would hear a familiar music played or sung by other
children in a near-by field, and almost involuntarily would begin
to dance, or to fling upon the fresh April wind the old refrain:
“At trai-lari, lai-lai
Trai-lari lai lai
Lai lai lai!”
But something had gone out of the joy of such singing. In the
words of the old spring song, the ah la la was all over. How
could anyone see what they had seen, and be the same?
There was something different in the air that spring. It was
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFUbSnveKoKAn9zu-AMzaBNKM9JrqBlb7vnXs6-wNAz8y7JdHdOpV1L1RMVhqb2-Afmm3LmRtTQEYrLB8Dn176-Soswv0a9av2Mdy0gRQXkYgE3MkgWcvSfvwSf8w_kCoVJoPXK=w491-h810-v0
like the odor of death hovering upon the fragrance of the new
flowers. Nearly everybody was depressed. Maria Rosa was desolate
when Manuel went away. One of Jacinta’s brothers also had gone
to war, and was said to have been killed. Fortunately the rumor
proved to be false; but Ti Marto and his family had many days
of torment and suspense. One day, when Jacinta and Francisco
were weeping at the thought of their brother’s death, Lucia pro¬
posed a dance to divert their minds; and the little ones began
to dance, still wiping the tears from their faces. Yet they were
often silent, all three, as they roamed over the scattered stones
at Valinhos or gazed across the valley from the cave at Cabego.
They had become aware at last of a world in anguish, a humanity
shackled for some obscure reason to the mystery of suffering.
Even May, the month of Mary, the month of new life and
joy, weighed heavily on the world that year. On May 5, as if to
voice the universal sadness and to point out the only source of
hope, Pope Benedict XV lamented, in a memorable letter, “the
cruel war, the suicide of Europe.” After begging God to turn
the hearts of rulers toward peace, and urging all to purge them¬
selves of sin and pray for peace, he especially asked that since all
graces were dispensed “by the hands of the most holy Virgin,
We wish the petitions of her most afflicted children to be directed
with lively confidence, more than ever in this awful hour, to the
great Mother of God.” Ffe directed that the invocation “Queen
of peace, pray for us,” be added to, the Litany of Loreto, and
continued:
“To Mary, then, who is the Mother of Mercy and omnipotent
by grace, let loving and devout appeal go up from every corner
of the earth—from noble temples and tiniest chapels, from royal
palaces and mansions of the rich as from the poorest hut—from
every place wherein a faithful soul finds shelter—-from blood-
drenched plains and seas. Let it bear to her the anguished cry of
mothers and wives, the wailing of innocent little ones, the sighs
of every generous heart: that her most tender and benign solicitude
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE3Qry6iBLeeu_rm3UtIWdqv7_qh2aXgN75gEc7DXD8dDW6V6tKrnu3HOsuAUfPI-YVJ7IOYmJecP3Nrqw5NhE8UpcfMyh6UPUaxCiFShcNJUVdHbK-dIb4LZutfU4o67ycZ5qeDA=w491-h810-v0
51
Our Lady of Fatima
may be moved and the peace we ask for be obtained for our
agitated world.”
It is quite improbable that Lucia and her cousins had even heard
of the Pope’s letter (for it was still unpublished) when diey went
out to the Serra five days later, the thirteenth of May, 1917. It
was an uncommonly fine Sunday, and Pi Marto had hitched up
his cart, early in the morning, to drive his wife Olimpia to Batalha,
where they could hear Mass at the exquisite cathedral, and after¬
wards do some shopping in the near-by Sunday markets—what
they wanted in particular was a young pig to raise for slaughter
in the fall. So off they went, cheerily enough, leaving the children
to attend Mass at Fatima. It was drawing toward noon when
Jacinta and Francisco got their sheep out of the patio and on the
road to the Lagoa, where as usual they met Lucia with her flock.
They all-proceeded across the fields to the meadows that Antonio
Abobora owned at Cova da Iria. Never was the immense sky
more blue, the land more dappled with pastel colors.
Soon after they arrived at the hill north of the depression called
the Cova and had got the sheep contentedly cropping the furze,
they decided to make a little thicket into a “house” by closing up
the opening to it with a wall; and they began to lug some of the
stones that were lying all about, and to set them one upon another.
While absorbed in this labor they were startled by a flash so bril¬
liant that they took it to be lightning. Without stopping to ask
how it could have come from that cloudless sky, they all dropped
their stones and ran helter-skelter down the slope toward a certain
holm-oak, or carrasqueira, about a hundred yards or more south¬
west of where they had been playing. They had just found shelter
under its thick wide-spreading foliage when there was a second
flash of light. Again frightened, the children left the tree and
darted toward the east, a distance of perhaps another hundred
yards. Then they stopped in amazement. For just before them,
on top of a small evergreen called the azinbeira—it was about
three feet high, and its glossy leaves had prickles on them, like
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFIhEJdCu_Qh7KMZTmwnUxzg4Pk7sgccF9p8qdv9B_-nsyu6RdIV2HCQlpop0pBxKul1PJzdLeig-67HYBeHzO8VVmpGWUbBaNN4--8CPYqmWNXb-kzTuzIriA6Xshdrem-zC48PQ=w491-h810-v0
a
52 Our Lady of Fatima
cactus—they saw a ball of light. And in the center of it stood
As Lucia describes her, she was “a Lady all of white, more
brilliant than the sun dispensing light, clearer and more intense
than a crystal cup full of crystalline water penetrated by the rays
of the most glaring sun.” Her face was indescribably beautiful,
“not sad, not happy, but serious”—perhaps somewhat reproachful,
though benign; her hands together as in prayer at her breast,
pointing up, with Rosary beads hanging down between the fingers
of the right hand. Even her garments seemed made solely of the
same white light; a simple tunic falling to her feet, and over it
a mantle from her head to the same length, its edge made of a
fiercer light that seemed to glitter like gold. Neither the hair nor
the ears could be seen. The features? It was almost impossible to
look steadily at the face; it dazzled, and hurt the eyes, and made
one blink or look away.
The children stood, fascinated, within the radiance that sur¬
rounded her for a distance of perhaps a meter and a half.
“Don’t be afraid,” she said, in a low musical voice, never to be
forgotten. “I won’t hurt you!”
They felt no fear now, in fact, but only a great joy and peace.
It was the “lightning,” really, that had frightened them before.
Lucia was self-possessed enough to ask a question:
“Where does Your Excellency come from?” The child used
the colloquialism of the Serra: “De onde e Vocemece?”
“I am from heaven.”
“And what is it you want of me?”
“I come to ask you to come here for six months in succession,
on the thirteenth day at this same hour. Then I will tell you who
I am, and what I want. And afterwards I will return here a seventh
time.”
“And shall I go to heaven too?”
“Yes, you will.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEDjKkUsGQdBInKUAwFFBnt4Rqyf-D9j9CIYFpe_FzOQzWMJJkNO0QGafHA9OF12Tir15Igz8br6cVuxx3NQP0ImsvaqsL0Un7ko2YU7ZXvwvFOx7b1Vw3psHQjGyuQyadHbggDpQ=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 53
“And Jacinta?”
“Also.”
“And Francisco?”
“Also. But he will have to say many Rosaries!”
Heaven! Lucia suddenly remembered two girls who had died
recently. They were friends of her family, and used to go to her
house to learn weaving from her sister Maria.
“Is Maria da Neves now in heaven?” she asked.
“Yes, she is.”
“And Amelia?”
“She will be in purgatory until the end of the world.”
Purgatory! The end of the world!
The Lady was speaking again:
“Do you wish to offer yourselves to God, to endure all the
suffering that He may please to send you, as an act of repara¬
tion for the sins by which Fie is offended, and to ask for the
conversion of sinners?”
“Yes, we do.”
“Then you will have much to suffer. But the grace of God will
be your comfort.”
As she spoke the words, “a graga de Deus,” the Lady opened
her lovely hands, and from the palms came two streams of light
so intense that it not only enveloped the children with its radiance,
but seemed to penetrate their breasts and to reach the most inti¬
mate parts of their hearts and souls, “making us see ourselves in
God”—these are Lucia’s words—“more clearly in that light than
in the best of mirrors.” An irresistible impulse forced them to
their knees and made them say, fervently:
“O most holy Trinity, I adore You! My God, my God, I love
You in the Most Blessed Sacrament!”
The Lady waited for them to finish this. Then she said, “Say
the Rosary'every day, to obtain peace for the world, and the end
of the war.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGCcVV-JFzhgY7GwYROj9yQTpB1eWPjSgBAVmgow5z5GrHGLc5f5zDI0M8bUA8ICiBgYVho8ug9g6jkC_rKtqK-ifdHpTCB7WKY8IMaIVXb_4vc6SubKBbW7euQ5LXRwiiYh1lZAA=w491-h810-v0
54 Our Lady of Fatima
Immediately after this she began to rise serenely from the azin-
heira and to glide away toward the east “until she disappeared in
the immensity of the distance.” 1
The children remained staring at the eastern sky for a long
time. Even after they began to recover from the state of ecstacy
which had come over them, they remained silent and pensive for
a good part of the afternoon. But they werb not heavy and tired
as they had been after seeing the Angel of Peace. The sight of
the Lady, on the contrary, had given them a delightful sense of
“peace and expansive joy,” of lightness and of freedom; they felt
almost as if they could fly like birds. Jacinta would say from
time to time:
“Ai, que Senhora tao bonita! Oh, such a pretty Lady!”
After a while they began to talk so freely that Lucia felt it
necessary to caution them not to tell anybody, even their mother,
what they had seen and heard. Francisco, as a matter of fact, had
seen the Lady but had not heard what she said, as when he saw
the Angel. When they told him all her words, he was intensely
happy, especially over the promise that he was going to heaven.
Folding his hands over his head, he cried:
“O my Our Lady, I will say all the Rosaries you want!”
“Ai, que Senhora tao bonita!” said Jacinta again.
“Well, I’m going to see if you tell anybody this time,” remarked
Lucia skeptically.
“I won’t tell, no, don’t worry!” answered the little girl. And
Francisco also promised not to tell a soul.
Lucia still had her doubts about Jacinta. The child’s face was
shining with joy. She was almost bursting with it.
1 This is Lucia’s phrase, at the end of her account in her Memoir IV, pp. 35, 36;
1941. It is an interesting coincidence that Monsignor Eugenio Pacelli was being
consecrated Bishop at the Sistine Chapel in Rome on May 13, 1917, the very day
when the children first saw the Lady of Fatima. As Pope Pius XII he took the
first step to carry out the Lady’s wishes in 1942.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEuwcRV1pefbksKUBP90VJpcBrK8HKVPnYcLMfqyMv0VmVY3uHWhT6EPHB0EUIvQZgHmAwBHzCDnmTVkWylyYlIiRahUQNmwEmuSSQqrKGnO25Xcljyg0Nur2JQgzpfS7sc6EuK=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER VI
When Jacinta and Francisco arrived home, they found the small
house alive with people and conversation. All the family, except
the boy in the army, were at home that Sunday; and an uncle
by marriage, Antonio da Silva, had dropped in for supper. As
the daylight began to wane, the older girls had placed a great
kettle of cabbage and potato soup on the hearth fire, and were
bringing loaves of tough brown bread out of a chest, when the
noise of a mule cart on the cobbles outside gave notice that their
parents had returned from Batalha.
Perhaps Jacinta meant only to welcome her mother when she
ran into the street and saw her standing looking at the wagon,
from which Ti Marto was extricating, with some difficulty but
with his usual skill and quiet determination, a young, struggling
and slippery pig. But at the sight of Olimpia’s kindly and ready
smile, the child ran to clasp her about the knees. And then out
it came. The temptation was too much.
“Mother, I saw Our Lady today at Cova da Ina!’’
Olimpia chuckled. “I believe you, child! Oh, yes, you are such
a good saint that you see Our Lady!” And she swept by into
the house.
“But I saw her,” insisted Jacinta, following. And rapidly she
told her everything almost in a breath: how they saw the light¬
ning, and how they feared and fled, and how Francisco asked
Lucia if he should throw a stone at the ball of light, and Lucia
said no; and what the Lady looked like and what she said. And
they must say the Rosary every day, and they were both going
to heaven! Think of it, heaven!
Olimpia saw that it was not a joke; yet how could she take it
55
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEuKcmK-XGfFkQRjOHnYlTWIpK-2D6TQm6udtyLoJU7rgoISGXbwEwiaR9GN_6xI_RiNWAVU_Ep3ZrQQdaIg88-EwJ-mPNCNJslgVBu6TfxPnRIPZ1KWRlLplNhSiafTNNGewbqkw=w491-h810-v0
seriously? “So you saw a Lady! And no one but Our Lady could
appear to you!’’ She bustled around, getting something ready
for the pig to eat, to prepare him for the important part he was
to play in the life of the family that year.1 Meanwhile Ti Marto
had been locking the squealing animal in a shed off the corral,
and had come in, weary enough and rather silent, for his supper.
A moment later he was sitting on the edge of the fireplace, eating
his hot dish of cabbage soup with batatas. Olimpia sat down
beside him. Then, to divert him, she bethought her of the strange
tale she had just had from her youngest daughter.
“O Jacinta! Jacinta, come tell your father what you told me
about the Lady in the Cova da Ina.”
Jacinta lost no time in repeating her story. Her dark eyes were
brilliant, her cheeks flushed. It was evident that whatever may
have happened, the child was deeply excited.
Ti Marto set down his dish gravely, and asked Francisco what
he had to say about all this.
It is not clear just what the boy said; but apparently it was
enough to confirm his sister’s story.
Ti Marto looked from one to the other, slowly trying to make
sense of it all. Olimpia still refused to take any of it seriously. “A
fine little saint indeed,” she repeated, “that Our Lady should
appear to her!” Perhaps there was some humility in her skepticism.
She and her brother Antonio Abobora came from a rather wild
family, more noted for charm and gaiety than for sanctity; even
to this day she gives the impression of being a bit bewildered by
what happened to her children.
“Well, if the youngsters did see a lady dressed in white,” put
in Antonio da Silva slowly, “who could it be but Our Lady?”
The mind of Ti Marto moved slowly, but accurately. He had
almost finished weighing and testing the two accounts, and in¬
terpreting the looks and inflections of his children. It was plain
1 Olimpia’s account to Father De Marchi, op. cit., p. 64.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF2VDaSj4PzqRdPvzWuKuxXJFu5dBm8cI6w9l6xU8t9V8S0ZOmj-jBXLXe9W5CBbaGbCgkmOWArQJtqNhpfMNvjMFgDDG5Itb12kkJq40mlfAQfFrN1cC1I9WInHadOnNQ7hcg-rA=w491-h810-v0
to him that they were not playing a prank on him. And as for
lying—“Ai, Jesus!" and this he repeats even to this day, “I always
found Francisco truthful, and Jacinta even more so.” Finally he
gave his decision.
‘‘From the beginning of the world Our Lady has appeared many
times in various ways,” he observed. “If the world is wicked, it
would be much more so but for many such happenings. The
power of God is great. We don’t know what this is, but it will
turn out to be something.” It occurred to him furthermore that
without some intervention of Providence the children could not
have repeated such big and imposing words, for they had had
little or no instruction, even in catechism. Thus Ti Marto with
his shrewd common sense became the first to believe in the story
of Fatima, on that Sunday evening in 1917.
Lucia knew nothing of all this until the next morning. She had
gone to bed happy, without saying a word about the events of
the afternoon, and had finally fallen asleep thinking of the beautiful
Lady all made of white radiance; and the first she knew it was
morning. She awoke early and went out to play under a fig tree
near the house until it was time to take the sheep to pasture.
After some time she saw her sister Maria of the Angels coming
to look for her, and was startled to hear her say, derisively:
“Oh, Lucia! I hear you have seen Our Lady at Cova da Ina!”
The child stared at her in silence.
“Is it true?” demanded Maria.
“Who told you?”
“The neighbors say that Ti Olimpia says Jacinta told her.”
“And I asked her not to tell anyone!” said Lucia, on the verge
of tears.
“Why?”
“Because I don’t know if it was Our Lady. It was a very pretty
little woman.”
“And what did this little woman say to you?”
“That she wanted us to go six months in a row to Cova da
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGftq2SMys2_SxXRr8O9trNV-7C2giOy6LipJSojeAJ-R7DXY01qG-owe20BXlrYe-z7TGf5Q5tlfK3K7aoljDr7PdUsWLwLIL2KwJQJB7IazZTI6cx_qFWrPXAvmB2QnTX6bFkVQ=w491-h810-v0
Iria, and that after that she was going to say who she was and
what she wanted.”
“Didn’t you ask her who she was?”
“I asked her where she came from, and she said, ‘I am from
heaven.’ And then she kept quiet.” 2
This at least is what that excellent woman, Maria dos Anjos,
recalls of the conversation after a quarter of a century. She was
not being unkind to Lucia. She simply did not believe the story,
and accepted her mother’s theory that the child had been perverse
enough to invent it. She felt she was only doing her duty when
she returned to the house to tell Maria Rosa all that had been said.
Lucia, of course, was summoned promptly before her parents.
Her father was inclined to dismiss the whole affair with a laugh.
“Women’s tales!” he said, as he set out for the greening fields.
“Silly women’s tales!” His wife, however, took the matter very
seriously, and gave her youngest daughter a tart scolding.
“This was all I needed for my old age!” she lamented bitterly.
“To think that I always brought my children up to speak the
truth! And now this one brings me a whopper like this!”
It was a forlorn and miserable Lucia who went out to the patio
that morning to let the sheep out of the fold. How suddenly the
world had changed from joy to misery! And then she saw Fran¬
cisco coming down the street, and looking very contrite. In fact,
he had tears in his eyes.
“Don’t cry any more,” said Lucia. “And don’t tell anyone
what the Lady told us.”
“I’ve already told it,” replied Francisco wretchedly, blaming
himself instead of Jacinta.
“What have you told?”
“I said that the Lady promised to take us to heaven. When
they asked me if that was true I couldn’t tell a he! Forgive me,
Lucia! I won’t ever tell anyone any more!”
2 Maria of the Angels’ account to Father De Marchi, who gives the entire con¬
versation, p. 66.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH_iDsqNFVVNgeC2zelsCdalzY2PpNyGSsjGYmlBbwIl5lqBCVO8-nhBZI89ceL1XI5zYmER6n5qY6SGYosojyJFPR5SUSYpNOvQ4JSYl_-K7eKaHjePsL2RtkPZhmphn2d_TRE=w491-h810-v0
59 Our Lady of Fatima
Somehow the discovery had spoiled their pleasure, and they were
all depressed when they pastured their sheep that day. Jacinta
sat pensive for a long time on a stone. Finally, Lucia said:
“Jacinta, go and play!”
“I don’t want to play today.”
“Why don’t you want to play?”
“Because I am thinking that that Lady told us to say the Rosary
and to make sacrifices for sinners. Now when we recite the Rosary
we have to say the whole Ave Maria and Padre Nostro."
“And the sacrifices? How are you going to make them?”
Francisco had an idea. “We can give our lunches to the sheep
and make the sacrifice of not eating any lunch.”
From that time on he often drank from the barreiro where the
sheep and goats took water and the women washed their clothes.
Jacinta thought of a better way of disposing of their lunches, how¬
ever. One day they saw some poor children from Moita, half a
mile away, coming to beg at Aljustrel. “Let us give them our
lunches for the conversion of sinners!” she said. And they did.
By the middle of the afternoon they were ravenously hungry, and
went looking about the moor for something to eat. Francisco tried
some of the acorns of an azinheira which were now green enough
to be edible, and found them palatable. Jacinta decided that if
they were so good it would be no sacrifice to eat them. Instead,
she picked up some acorns of a different sort under a large oak
and began to munch them. Yes, they were bitter, she admitted.
But she would offer the bad taste for the conversion of sinners.
Every day from then on Jacinta made a lunch of these bitter
aforns or of sour unripe olives.
“Don’t ear those, Jacinta!” said Lucia one day. “They are very
bitter.”
“It is for the bitterness that I eat,” said Jacinta simply. “To
convert sinners.”
It was not long before the children of poor families began to
wait for them along the roadsides to ask for their lunches. The
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHzISNpuCSDhdKv4yQ23wvN9OhRuQjY3HZtYbmJpJcJ2E_3yreY8MUTYTSKXJ8ux0t71n3kFQddjvVJlb7TT0OksI1n3aJEU8g7YF4YBZvcf770BLLWLHw23CTpM7_ycS8tJVFttA=w491-h810-v0
three always gave them cheerfully, and then ate whatever they
happened to find as they roamed about the Serra. “We used to
eat pine cones,” Lucia remembers, “roots of bind-weed, and of
a little yellowish flower that grows on the root of a little ball of
of the size of an olive; mulberries, mushrooms, and some things
that we picked from the roots of pine trees, but I don’t remember
what they are called.” 3
The most resolute in carrying out the Lady’s wishes regarding
sacrifices was Jacinta, if we are to take literally the modest recital
of Lucia. One sweltry day that summer they went to a certain
field that a neighbor had lent to Maria Rosa, and on the way,
according to custom, gave their lunches to some of the beggar
children. When they reached their destination, after a long hot
walk, they were all tired, hungry and parched. There was no water
about fit for human beings; even Francisco, apparently, was unable
to drink from the little pool where the sheep relieved their thirst.
No matter! They all offered up their pains for sinners as usual.
But the sun got hotter and hotter, and as the afternoon wore on they
found their resolution weakening, until Lucia suggested that they
go to a house not far away and ask for a little water.
When they did this, a good woman gave them a small piece of
bread, which Lucia divided with her companions, and a jug of
water, which they took back to the pasture. There Lucia offered
it first to Francisco.
“I don’t want to drink,” he said.
“Why?”
“I want to suffer for the conversion of sinners.”
“You drink, Jacinta.”
“I want to offer a sacrifice for sinners, too.”
The rest of this episode, so casually told by Lucia in her maturity,
is worthy of that King who, hot from battle and served with water
for which a soldier had risked his life, poured it on the ground
8 Memoir I, p. 13.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHCBQBRzEL11LDjh43dpipSLsSXYfn-ilFNxS5M8yS5TL4I4Uu6rb19i202I0uac3riaOltEI1qcfwl5JPZTizItWl66IfUGXAtNcyf3kOGA9e-jpGdaot0sIwtwQwrylWoej4PWg=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 61 s
as an offering of gratitude to the Lord God of Battles. The young
shepherd girl of Aljustrel was moved by a spirit no less royal than
that of the shepherd who was ancestor to the Messias and to His
Mother, Our Lady of Fatima. And like David, let us note in
passing, she was not without talent for narration:
“Then I poured the water into a hollow of the rock for the sheep
to drink, and went to return the vessel to its mistress. The heat
became more intense each moment, the grasshoppers and crickets
were joining their song to that of the frogs in the near-by pond
and were making an intolerable clamor. Jacinta, weak from fasting
and from thirst, said with the simplicity that was natural to her:
‘Tell the crickets and the frogs to keep quiet, it gives me such
a headache!’
“Francisco said, ‘Don’t you want to suffer this for sinners?’
“Jacinta, pressing her head between her little hands, said, ‘Yes,
I do. Let them sing!’ ” 4
If the children were taking the requests of the White Lady so
seriously, Maria Rosa was no less constant in her determination
to destroy what she considered a deception and a blot on the
family honor. Stung by the neighbors’ gossip, which the state of
her health perhaps made her exaggerate, she felt responsible before
God for making her daughter confess that she had imposed a he
upon the Marto children and deceived heaven knows how many
worthy citizens. With threats and promises, with scoldings and
caresses, she did all in her power to break down the serene assur¬
ance with which Lucia repeated her story. “If you don’t say it
was a lie,” she said one day, “I will lock you up in a dark room
where you will never see the light of the sun again!” Another
time in exasperation she went so far as to beat her with the end
of a broom. When all these measures failed, she took her to the
rectory to see if the Prior could bring her to remorse and restitu¬
tion. All in vain.
4 Memoir I, pp. 13-15.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHN9B7IDlSWoH119CvTjJbGLqQHbJvwJRWAKfdTbIYdtQoLzlsfdBfNeob7KpBu4OeJAv57u8LKw5NpqZQU-OhoNTTVa09wIBKPVUqyO2rNi_AL3q212gZ7a4rk_MLIQXewxm4L=w507-h822-v0
62 Our Lady of Fatima
Lucia was beginning to understand what the Lady had meant
when she said, “You will have much to suffer.” Not only did her
mother continue to coax and to rail, not only did her own sisters
lacerate her with ridicule more cruel than they could guess, but
everyone in Aljustrel seemed to have turned against her. As she
went pattering along the cobbled street, she would hear one
woman say, “If she were my child—” and another remark, “A
good strong dose of quince tea would put an end to those visions!”
Even the small children would yell, as she went by, “Hey, Lucia,
is Our Lady going to walk over the roofs today?”
Yet with all this petty persecution there were consolations. One
day two visiting priests stopped in to speak encouragingly to her,
and to ask her to pray for the Holy Father. “Who is the Holy
Father?” One of the priests explained. And every day, from then
on, the children would add three Aves to their Rosary for the
Pope, the successor of Saint Peter. It gave them a glow of im¬
portance to think that they could do something, so far away, to
help the Vicar of Christ. Think of it, the visible head of the
Church! And Francisco! What a comfort he was! He seemed
not only to accept suffering, but to love it, as the saints do who
follow in the footsteps of the Crucified. “Our Lady told us we
would have much to suffer,” he would say. “That doesn’t matter
to me, I will suffer everything as much as she wants!” Or when
Lucia was on the verge of tears, thinking of the ill-treatment she
was receiving at home and abroad, he said, “Never mind! Didn’t
Our Lady say we should have much to suffer?” And Lucia took
heart again.
Another characteristic of the saints that Francisco began to mani¬
fest after the apparition of the Lady was the love of solitude. One
May morning he left the two girls with the sheep, and climbed
to the top of a high rock.
“You can’t come up here!” he called down. “Leave me
alone!”
It was a refreshing sunny day, and Lucia and Jacinta began
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFtqO-HK9YbIWSDnN2lC9Tb4rV7ZR6OJbPxplqEK4dBd56SGWcNvP1BPgyac-E6ANLbriCtIKIX3Fdar9Z0-KBaUd6m84bdeXFC2qvO0CRhoa3II87AKp82BkxAdjBOE4OkJCPYhQ=w507-h822-v0
to run after butterflies. By the time they weaned of this they had
forgotten all about Francisco, and they thought no more of him
until they realized that they were hungry, and that it must be
long past the time for their merenda. There he was, still lying
motionless on the top of the rock. 7
“Francisco! Francisc'd, don’t you want to come down and eat
your lunch?”
“No. You eat.”
“And say the Rosary?”
Later on.
When Lucia called him again, he said, teasingly, “You come
and pray here.”
The girls were not to be outdone. With much scraping of fingers
and bruising of knees they managed to scramble to the top, where,
breathless but triumphant, they demanded, “What have you been
doing all this time?”
“I have been thinking of God, who is so sad because of so
many sins,” the boy answered seriously. “If only I could give
Film joy!”
Some days they forgot the sinners for a little while in the zest
of living with which God has endowed all children. Once they
sang a variation of one of the old spring songs:
“The screech owl sings at night
And tries to frighten me.
As she disrobes the young girl
Sings in the moonlight.
Ah la la!
The nightingale in the field
Sings all day long.
The turtle dove sings in the wood.
Even the cart squeaks a song.
Ah la la!
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFoBuD7km4IzKb9_eTSBHYUwIIOPOCP60GRWSg1f3KMvxRWx5N7939Iv-xnPyY2RDHq_8SjF_a6rkJrF_d1hC6gMoG8W-92WG0DeqltPbQOHOJIhgCjRZymBheyOi_bs0cnnlfoNQ=w491-h810-v0
The Serra is a garden
Smiling all the day,
And drops of dew are gleaming
On the mountains.
Ah la la!”
It all sounded so good that they did it a second time. Then
Francisco remembered.
“We shouldn’t sing that any more,” he said. “Since we saw
the Angel and Our Lady I don’t care about singing.”
It was June now, and as the thirteenth drew near, they could
hardly wait to keep their promise to the Lady to return to Cova
da Ina. Maria Rosa welcomed the day also, but for a different
reason. June 13 was the feast of Saint Anthony, the most popular
saint in the country—and why not, when he was born in Lisboa,
and prayed at Coimbra long before he wrought miracles at Padua?
He belonged to Portugal, and certainly to the people of Fatima,
whose church was, named for him. On his feast day there would
always be a Missa Cantata, a fervent sermon and a colorful pro¬
cession, besides music, fire-works and feasting. And because alms¬
giving had been so dear to the Saint, there would be a generous
distribution of what is called “Saint Anthony’s bread.” Special
fine white loaves, much better than the dark ones that most people
on the Serra have throughout the year, were baked for the poor.
These were stacked upon ox-carts and sundry conveyances loaned
by the most prosperous farmers and other householders, and gaudily
decorated for the occasion with flowers, flags and bright-colored
patchwork counterpanes. When the festive wagons, with their loads,
had arrived at the church, they were lined up in the adjacent open
lot behind a barrier of stakes in which there were two apertures.
Through one of these the poor and the children passed to get their
bread; through the other they departed in orderly fashion. Nobody
went away empty-handed.
Maria Rosa knew how much her youngest daughter loved those
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGne2A-LdaXwLM-dp_H3zDRiEu3FyYF7nWCDb2TnxdfPIPETX-K5jHrPAJT-tjVJn9pgIIqJx9TJOs1KWM9bO1PaFNVO4NqPo4Puti8K6yo1-3whzvPe7v_C_hZxR1BsZchuP_6=w491-h810-v0
» ■/
fresh white loaves, the gaiety of the fiesta, the colors, the music,
the fire-works. What a blessing that this year it would come on
the very day when the little fools were planning to carry on more
of their nonsense at Cova da Ina! She knew Lucia, and she and
her older daughters were confident that Saint Anthony would
restore her to the sanity of truth and obedience. All that June 12
they enlarged, for her benefit, upon the attractions of the next day.
Lucia said nothing. When they pressed her for an answer, she
replied firmly, “I am going tomorrow to Cova da Iria. That’s what
the Lady wants.” But her elders doubted this. “We’ll see if you’ll
leave the feast to go to talk with that Lady!” said Maria Rosa
disdainfully.
Ti Olimpia was inclined to agree with her sister-in-law. She
could hardly believe, from past experience, that Jacinta and Fran¬
cisco would forego all the fun at the church for an imaginary Lady.
But she did not allow herself to be upset about the matter. Her
husband found himself in a more embarrassing position when his
little daughter begged him to go along to Cova da Ina. He did
not wish to expose himself to ridicule on the one hand, or to
offend his children on the other. Happily he remembered that
there was to be a fair in a near-by village next day, and that he
had to buy a couple of oxen. So he must miss both the feast and
the apparition. Well, well! There was no doubt that Ti Marto’s
duty was to look after the stocking of his farm. This solution
pleased his Olimpia also, and she decided to go with him.
Maria Rosa was made of no such flexible stuff. She did all in her
power to discourage Lucia from returning to Cova da Ina. Doubt¬
less she would have employed stronger measures if she had not
happened to talk the matter over with the new pdroco, Father
Manuel Marques Ferreira.
“Let them go if they persist:,” he advised, prudently, “and see
what! happens. Then bring them to me and I will question them.
We’ll get to the bottom of this yet!”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGpUKAFFtRonF_KNWrkixtzwV7Bdqd0QDYCgPsAgVWjrtZfpfAsjN7iaRDmuPTYnF_2WJTK9NPqd7VgrDk7oT8kftYyK5ShMQVZtTaZ9xOEagi6Q3ENFToZQ8WAHmAUYfROaweG5A=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER VII
On the Feast of Saint Anthony the shepherds of Aljustrel take
their sheep to graze much earlier than on other days, and bring
them back to the inclosure at about nine o’clock, in good time to
attend the Missa Cantata at ten. Lucia had her flock out of the
corral before the sun had begun to redden the rim of the eastern
ridge. She had probably been out in the meadows a good while,
perhaps munching a piece of bread (for so the shepherd children
generally eat, instead of sitting at a table) when her brother
Antonio came running across the fields to tell her that there were
several people at the house, looking for her.
Leaving the boy in charge of the sheep, she hurried home and
found men and women from various places far and near—from
Minde near Tomar, from Carrascos, from Boleiros. For the story
of the May apparition had somehow spread all over the moun¬
tains. Many believed it; others were merely curious to see what
would happen; and quite a number had taken the trouble to get
up before dawn and walk over the hills to accompany the children
to Cova da Ina. Lucia was not at all pleased. But she told her
visitors that if they would wait until she returned from eight-o’clock
Mass, they might follow her if they chose. Then she departed for
Fatima.
They waited patiently for some two hours or more under the
fig trees near the house. Naturally their presence was not very
agreeable to Maria Rosa and her eldest daughters, and many acid
comments were passed about the whole proceeding in general, and
their folly in particular. This did not discourage the pilgrims. They
waited, looked around, laughed, talked quietly until Lucia returned
from Mass.
It was about eleven o’clock when the child finally left home,
66
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHX-klYhlNvc8lm9y-gY7KeTj3wm9MtSRK23kzBXj0u-oOf-b_Ch7HS3_GAnCTyqCWnpNykpzR2NjZtmsiJ2Q5qWS2hxu-8u5wHyn7_w8M6702nLr7kG03R_t4V7pKfqphIaN_uXg=w491-h810-v0
with the strangers fanning out on either side of her. I felt very
very bitter that day,’l she remembers, for the disdain and contempt
of her mother and sisters had cut her to the heart. “I recalled the
times that were past, and I asked myself where was the affection
which my family had had for me only a little while ago.” And
now to be followed through the village by all these impertinent
strangers, who asked her a thousand questions! Sne began to weep
as she walked along. Her face was wet with tears when she stopped
at the Marto house.
“Don’t cry!” said jacinta, when she saw the red eyes and
quivering lips. “Surely these must be the sacrifices that the Angel
said God was going to send us. That is why you suffer and to
make reparation to Him, and to convert sinners!
Lucia dried her eyes, and the three, followed by the strangers,
walked briskly down the main road and over the fields for half
an hour or more. At Cova da Iria they found awaiting them another
group of devout or curious persons from hamlets far and near.
There was a woman from Loureira, a little man from Lomba de
Equa, others from Boleiros, Torres Novas, Anteiro; and Maria
Carreira and her daughters from Moita. There must have been
at least fifty. Maria Carreira is one of many reliable witnesses who still live
near the scene; it was there, in fact, that I spoke with her in the
summer of 1946, for she is the caretaker of the shrine and is known
as Maria da Capelinha. A widow of seventy-five, always dressed
neatly in black with a kerchief of the same color over her white
hair, she looks younger than she is, for she is straight, slender,
and quick in her motions. She has the serenity of one who has
nothing more to ask of life; her blue-gray eyes are calm, honest,
searching, intelligent. She remembers clearly how she happened
to be at Cova da Iria on that Feast of Saint Anthony, 1917. She
had been planning it for weeks. Two or three days after the May
apparition, her husband had been working with Antonio Abobota,
the father of Lucia, weeding a garden, and he came home with a
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH5rmxjFepGd6LYdh_UIKrw80Y62g5TLrxUQ2zuu-JJMmj1CF0WegaxjzfV516mSm02lUahzuhAPBlvf_Okvlp1S1RebRxATteadkea24lfZiKwaM_HMXs1pdtrZlGqfamysTlUrw=w491-h810-v0
strange tale. Antonio had told him that Our Lady had appeared
at Cova da Iria to his youngest daughter and to two of the children
of his sister Olimpia, who was married to Ti Marto. Carreira
thought it was crazy nonsense. But his wife took it seriously. Their
son John was a cripple, hunch-backed, with knees that crossed and
knocked together as he walked. Maria clutched at the thought
that it might be true, and that Our Lady might return the follow¬
ing month and cure the lad.
As soon as Lucia reached the place, according to the story Maria
Carreira told Father De Marchi (and confirmed to me last summer)
she stopped about nine feet from an azinheira, facing east, with
Jacinta on one side of her and Francisco on the other. Presently
they all sat down to wait, for it was not quite noon, and the crowd,
too, began to relax. Some opened their wicker baskets and drew
forth loaves of bread and bottles of wine. A few offered the
children bits of food, which they declined, though they did accept
oranges, holding them in their hands. Jacinta began to, play,
until Lucia told her to stop. A girl from Boleiros commenced to read
in a loud voice from a prayer book.
Maria Carreira, who had been ill, felt faint from standing.
“Will Our Lady delay much longer?” she inquired.
“No, Senhora, not very long,” replied Lucia, scanning the
eastern sky.
They all said five decades of the Rosary. This done, the pious
girl from Boleiros started the Litany of Our Lady. Lucia inter¬
rupted her, remarking that there would not be time. Then, arising
from the ground, she cried,
“Jacinta, there comes Our Lady! There is the light!”
The three children then ran to the azinheira, and the crowd
closed in behind them. Maria Carreira still remembers the details
of the scene with some vividness: “We knelt on the bushes and
the gorse. Lucia raised her hands as if in prayer and I heard her
say, ‘Your Excellency told me to come here, please say what you
want of me.’ Then we began to hear something like this, some-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHenyReCvAigyHYuTQRMfjLFfi4uz4Mtzyd0Yku2WkjG194jAasTkT2xg7mK_F8Zcj_siDNta0I5MiLWZrL8K9bsDshqwpLDGh_B-3KUqLkcY4YHVvaM_6keE71iDnEYPfd0wIaoQ=w491-h810-v0
thing like a very faint voice, but we could not understand what
it was saying. It was like the buzzing of a bee.” 1
Some of the bystanders noticed that the light of the sun seemed
■dimmer during the following minutes, though the sky was cloud¬
less. Others said that the top of the azinheira, covered with new
growth, appeared to bend and curve just before Lucia spoke, as if
under a weight.
In Lucia’s own artless but telling account, she asked, ‘‘What
does Your Excellency want of me?” substantially as in the story
of Maria Carreira. The Lady replied:
“I want you to come here on the thirteenth day of the coming
month, to recite five decades of the Rosary 2 every day, and to
learn to read. I will tell you later what I want.”
Lucia then asked for the cure of a certain sick person.
‘‘If he is converted, he will be cured during the year,” was the
reply.
“I should like to ask you to take us to heaven,” continued the
child.
“Yes, Jacinta and Francisco I will take soon. But you remain
here for some time more. Jesus wishes to make use of you to have
me acknowledged and loved. He wishes to establish in the world
the devotion to my Immaculate Heart.”
“I stay here?” Lucia was in dismay. “Alone?”
“No, daughter. And do you suffer a great deal? Don’t be dis¬
couraged. I will never forsake you. My Immaculate Heart will
be your refuge and the road that will conduct you to God.”
With these last words she opened her hands, as she had on the
previous occasion, and again communicated to them the light that
streamed in two rays from her palms, enveloping the children in
its heavenly radiance.
1 De Marchi, op. cit., p. 78.
2 The word Our Lady used, according to Lucia, was "terqo," meaning “a third”
—that is, five of the fifteen decades of the Rosary.
In addressing Lucia, alone, Our Lady always used the tender singular form, "/«"
—“thou”—instead of the formal “you.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFaTTQgcMxoo8lL65NTtvJXvBGp3jxB-_wO_TkrT3om5-tkrBGQEqxsuxEZlzx8rS2REfuKs8PhRN5vKI0ZrdxRtT-LGIGRO75Av8RuHYx_34yea8WuLUhNoQkw8zjBP-v27a8h=w491-h810-v0
“In it we saw ourselves as if submerged in God,” wrote Lucia.
“Jacinta and Francisco seemed to be in the part of this light that
went up toward heaven, and I in that which spread itself over
the ground. Before the palm of the right hand of Our Lady was
a Heart encircled by thorns which seemed to have pierced it like
nails. We understood that it was the Immaculate Heart of Mary
outraged by the sins of humanity, for which there must be
reparation.” 3
The Immaculate Heart of Mary! The Angel had said some¬
thing about that. “Through the infinite merits of His Most Sacred
Heatt and of the Immaculate Heart of Mary, I beg of You the
conversion of sinners.” Now the children saw both Jesus and Mary
in that vision of the Most Blessed Trinity that enfolded them.
Our Lady seemed neither sad nor joyful, but always “serious”;
but the impression left by the Word of God, on the mind of
Francisco, at any rate, was one of infinite sadness.
As this tremendous revelation faded from their view, the Lady,
still surrounded by the light which emanated from her, arose
without effort from the little tree, and glided swiftly toward the
east until she could be seen no longer. Some of the people standing
around noticed that the new leaves on the top of the azinheira
were drawn in the same direction, as if the Lady’s garments had
been trailed across them, and it was several hours before they
gradually returned to their usual position.
Lucia remained looking at the vast emptiness of the sky. Maria
Carreira heard her say, “Pronto! Now she can’t be seen any more.
Now she is entering heaven. Now the doors are being shut.”
The people were intensely excited. Though none of them had
seen the Lady, it was evident that something extraordinary had
occurred. Some began to ask questions of the children, others to
3 Memoir IV, pp. 37-38. The revelation of the Immaculate Heart devotion has
been called “the June secret” in some accounts. Lucia has explained that Our Lady
did not ask to have it kept secret. Something within them made the children keep
it secret for die time being.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE24azj8lYO7Quq1GHPOyD3L7kVyYFJ-fI4PbxxAa1sFk-BqupLZhqPZoPe9zVHXmkQNozkCs2iqHYpWkaX1FOmbpaSoCniW59rIq7DOn7f2PrnomaoPbFGuDEzemzVftBnow4OTw=w491-h810-v0
71 Our Lady of Fatima
dispute among themselves. Many were examining the azinheira
and exclaiming over the dislocation of the new growth. A few
were plucking the top leaves for relics or souvenirs, and there
would probably have been nothing left of the poor bush if Lucia
had not had presence of mind to ask them to take only the lower
ones, which Our Lady had not touched. Maria Carreira was gather¬
ing some of the rosemary which grew all about, filling the air
with its sharp fragrance; she was already thinking of setting up
an altar or shrine on the spot.
“Let’s say the Rosary!” said someone. “No, the Litany,” cried
another. “We have to say the Rosary on the way home.” Reciting
one or the other, they broke up into small groups and moved off
slowly in various directions.
It was not until about four o’clock that Lucia and her com¬
panions were able to set out for Aljustrel, followed by a few of
the more curious spectators, who still pestered them with questions
and supplications. Some of them were inclined to be flippant.
“So Our Lady didn’t say anything to you this time, Jacinta?”
No reply.
“What’s this, Francisco, are you still here? Didn’t you go to
heaven?”
“What did she say to you, Lucia? Come now, tell us.”
The children resented this sort of questioning. They were still
somewhat dazed from their experience; it was not easy to turn their
thoughts back to everyday affairs. To some they gave laconic
answers. To others none at all. Most commonly they would say,
“It’s a secret. I can’t talk about it.” Finally the last of the strangers
became discouraged and took themselves off, leaving them in peace.
Francisco had many questions of his own to ask when they
were alone. As on the first occasion in May, he had seen all that
Jacinta and Lucia had seen, but had heard nothing that the Lady
said—only the voice of his cousin. And even after they had ex¬
plained everything to him, he was still puzzled about many details,
especially about the reference to the Immaculate Heart. Yes, he
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGt85XyJirmhzT8V1MY6j410sGAma0SnkXSeP0wePEc7L6cR155JSbrEu5aRoOJYIzswICZxzQ7j5uO3VwNqPthYPRe8_Dys4CvuwOtiNc0oy6QY7xfU0I3ESyuVLs1Gp5LqQnRHg=w491-h810-v0
72 Our Lady of Fatima
had seen the Heart, and could not forget the rays of light from
the Lady’s hands, which he had felt penetrating his own breast.
“But why was Our Lady with a Heart in her hand,” he per¬
sisted, “scattering on the world such a great light that is God?
You were with Our Lady in the light I saw on the ground, Lucia.
And Jacinta and I were going up toward the sky.”
“It’s this way,” said Lucia. “You and Jacinta are soon going to
heaven, and I stay with the Immaculate Heart of Mary for some
time longer on earth.”
“How many years will you stay here?”
t “I don’t know. Plenty.”
“Was it Our Lady who said so?”
“It was. And I saw it in that light that struck us in the breast.”
“That’s right,” put in Jacinta. “I saw that too.” 4
“I am going to heaven soon!” said Francisco. And from then
on he often said it ecstatically. “Jacinta and I are going to heaven
soon! Heaven! Heaven!”
The two younger children ran home full of joy, while Lucia,
more thoughtful, went on her way alone to her own house.
When Jacinta and Francisco burst in, Ti Manuel and his Olimpia
had just returned from the fair with two fine fat oxen, with which
they were well pleased. Other members of the family had been at
the festivities at Fatima. But the two youngest children became the
center of attention the moment they appeared' in the doorway.
“We saw the Lady again, Mother!” cried Jacinta, “and she told
me that I am going to heaven soon!”
“Nonsense!” said Olimpia. “What Lady?”
“The beautiful Lady. She came again today.”
“Beautiful?” repeated one of the family. “Is she as pretty as
So-and-so?”
“Much, much prettier!”
“Is she as pretty as that saint in the church with so many stars
4 Memoir IV, pp. 9-10.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFOqFlBRrw3KXbNZbClzjZTqmOPYRHR_gRk6nI4zFUAghL-y4IM9UdqncmRHig9Nnx-z4iMSF3u5-ziIrJY2DTMHTwc1zQehNPn1ft4vwJ5NBiRHuojRXZqqx8QzRmwSrn6AjRgpA=w491-h810-v0
on her mantle?” demanded another, referring to the image of
Saint Quiteria at Saint Anthony’s.
“No! Much, much prettier!”
“As pretty as Our Lady of the Rosary?”
“Much more yet!”
“Well, what did she tell you this time?”
“To say the Rosary, and to go again every month till October.”
“Is that all?”
J'acinta felt perhaps that she had said too much already. “The
rest is a secret.”
“Oh, a secret! A secret! Tell us the secret!”
But nothing could persuade either of the children to do that.
Ti Marto has often chuckled over this conversation. “All the
women wanted to know what the secret was,” he reminisces. “But
I never asked them. A secret is a secret, and it has to be kept.” 5
Lucia meanwhile was being received by a much more skeptical
and less cordial audience. Her insistence that Our Lady had ap¬
peared to her a second time made no impression on a family
already convinced that she had become an unconscionable liar. It
fanned the holy indignation of Maria Rosa, on the contrary, almost
-to the combustion point. To think that fifty persons had made fools
of themselves by going to Cova da Iria, and all on account of her
good-for-nothing Lucia, who was bringing her so fast to her grave!
During the next few days Maria Rosa became yet more exas¬
perated, if possible. Almost every gossip she knew brought her
evidence of the tremendous sensation her daughter had caused,
even in the remotest corners of the Serra. Most of the witnesses
had believed in the apparition. Hence the news had been scattered
profusely in all directions and, although many still doubted, nothing
else was talked of.
The last straw was when Lucia ventured to ask her mother to
send her to school, since the Lady had told her to learn to read.
5 De Marchi, op. cit., p. 84.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGlHt5MzaIWDv-awUVeKihgbAgW_dcC-XjC1cFHQEUppLjNH0IFE8IwGy1dln0gfEjVi6xP_VjIMhI8LJ4WAcfzC_Fu1hrFLNSmDYQflUPPUv3EX-aZ3KSvXbMUvxA29oZDg97SFA=w491-h810-v0
74 Our Lady of Fatima
“School, indeed!” said Maria Rosa with withering sarcasm. “A
lot it matters to Our Lady whether the likes of you can read and
write!”
Fortunately perhaps for her health of mind and spirit, Maria
Rosa bethought herself in good time of what the pastor, Father
Ferreira, had said.
“Tomorrow,” she said, “we are going again to see the Prior.
And this time you are going to tell him the truth!”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFt_HZodMzBOuyQ3p1hTN5JRnd5RVsBliNfvpiz9PzqmI33WQgbLTZw9M3BVSAOw7wRfSJtJv7PRrvhGXGaqKV5Sfx8QUl-Do2kMWi6ky9gppYDuHTUCaAi0TXduwtxL8arlIC9IQ=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER VIII
Early next morning the two set out for Fatima, Maria Rosa
stalking grimly ahead until they came to the Marto cottage.
There she paused to unburden her heart to Ti Olimpia, and
Lucia, weeping bitterly, had a few furtive words with Jacinta.
“Don’t cry!” said the younger girl. “I will call Francisco, and
while you are gone we will pray for you.”
Lucia dried her tears and followed her mother up the hill to the
church of Saint Anthony. Not once did Maria Rosa glance behind,
not a word did she mutter. In her black dress, black kerchief and
dark shawl she was as silent and ominous as an executioner. Her
bare feet fell with deadly precision on the stones of the winding
road. Even her sloping shoulders and dumpy form suggested iron
resolution that morning.
Before going to the rectory, Maria Rosa entered the church to
hear Mass. This respite was some relief to her daughter. As she
knelt before the uplifted Host and Chalice, the poor child offered
all her sufferings to Him who had suffered so much for men.
“You will have much to suffer.” How well the Lady had known!
The Mass over, Lucia followed her mother out of the church
and across the parched and trampled field to the house of the
Paroco.
It was not until she was halfway up the flight of some fifteen
or more steps, leading to the rectory porch, that Maria Rosa deigned
to give any sign that she was aware of her daughter’s miserable
existence. Turning abruptly, she said over her shoulder:
“Don’t annoy me any more! Tell the Prior now that you lied,
so that on Sunday he can say in the church that it was a lie, and
end the whole thing before all the people go running to Cova
da Iria to pray in front of a holm oak bush!” 1
1 Memoir II, p. 15, 1937.
75
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH1WP0nmisVS2tDTbBpnpIP634PTqa3XgRDIX_0ZdUZZAu-KiEVpKFukbLgOkg97ldzB52GlqZBbFq81D8l2ljQgnJ3lGjBiJ3u9CN-hKjl8e_zqbj_hRrBhXPA5gi5DTys-ncg5Q=w491-h810-v0
Father Ferreira received them with grave courtesy, and asked
them to sit on a bench and wait for a few moments. After a while
he invited Lucia to step into his study, where he proceeded to
ask her many many questions, very minute questions—“I am
almost tempted to say boring questions,” she added when she
came to write the story twenty years later—but always with kind¬
ness and delicacy. He had already examined Jacinta and Francisco.
He was comparing all the answers in his mind. And at the end
he seemed convinced that the children had told the truth about
what they had seen and heard. Yet his conclusion was even more
alarming, in a way, than if he had convicted them of lying.
“It doesn’t seem to me like a revelation from heaven,” he ven¬
tured, thoughtfully. “It may be a deception of the devil, you
know! We shall see. We shall see.” He arose as a sign of dis-
missal. “We shall give our opinion later on,” he added to Maria
Rosa.
The devil! That was a possibility that had never occurred to
Lucia or to her mother. The reading of Maria Rosa had not car¬
ried her very deeply into mystical theology. It is hardly probable
that she had read the difficult pages in which Saint Teresa of
Avila recorded her torments at the hands of friends who suspected
that her visions and ecstacies had been suggested by the enemy
of God and man. Nor were such timid counselors necessarily to
be blamed. For the Church has learned, from centuries of experi¬
ence, that evil spirits can counterfeit the appearances of sanctity,
and that all such manifestations must be tested thoroughly before
they are accepted as coming from God. There was once a notorious
impostor in Spain who deceived many holy persons by pretending
to have the stigmata of Christ and to live on the sacred Host
alone.
Lucia went home exhausted, abashed, and terrified. Nor was
her anguish at all lessened by the utter abhorrence, of her mother,
who lost no opportunity, from then on, to belabor her with words
and sometimes even with blows and kicks. The girl felt like an
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFgK55bTvxIk1ABWWj4ikjoBCgrMEpEHlIu_IY5_eMIQaUnltmeXO7NnhHttDIu9C7rnI3zw9nBxR_CUAPa80jUFcTMbWLOHNMEHmDvMx4l00JtW4gMsk4vGqPOal8W3tb3b_kfEA=w491-h810-v0
outcast as she glided through the house and stole out again to seek
the quiet of the old well where she had once seen the Angel, and
where she had shed so many tears and said so many prayers in
other times of woe. And there she found Francisco and Jacinta,
still praying.
Jacinta ran to embrace her and to ask how she had got on with
the Senhor Prior. They listened wide-eyed, with growing indigna¬
tion, as she repeated many of the Paroco’s questions and his final
remarks.
“It’s not the devil,” cried Jacinta. “No! They say the devil is
very foul and ugly, and he is under the ground, in hell. And that
Lady is so beautiful, and we saw her go up to heaven!” 2
Francisco was of the same opinion and nodded approval when
his sister continued to encourage Lucia with:
“Look here! We don’t have to be afraid of anything. That Lady
will always help us. And she is such a friend of ours!” 3
This was undeniable. Yet all that night Lucia lay awake,
thinking of the Prior’s words, and wondering, as many others have
wondered, if she could have become, without knowing it, the
instrument of God’s enemy to bring contempt and ridicule upon
everything holy. Night after night she suffered as only children
can suffer when there is no older person who will understand
their enormous perplexities and griefs. Every day under the hearten¬
ing assurances of her young cousins the fears and doubts of
solitary hours melted into the warm sunlight and the fragrance
of mint and rosemary, as they all carelessly followed the sheep
over the Serra. It was different when darkness skulked about her,
and the same fear returned to lour by her bedside or to trouble
her dreams. As the time approached for the July rendezvous with
the White Lady, she was so tired and limp from this constant
battering of invisible foes that she decided, at last, that the Prior
must be right; and on the afternoon of July 12, she informed her
2 Memoir II, p. 18.
s Memoir I, p. 15.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG317NiDxxBS1BcHy_d-nPijl3KAylZCu7vZ4TdoQlD0VOUiFM8QaAG8qqxyMOVdwdu5QhjewZw4w2kHUy31n8zJbWLVQEw4N_pXfFdqej3b6McYoml4D-UTMjMXMx0-wHWEm1y6w=w491-h810-v0
two little cousins that she did not intend to go to Cova da Ina
the following day.
After the first howl of dismay, there was a long earnest
discussion.
“How can you think it was the devil?” asked Francisco. “Didn’t
you see Our Lady and Our Lord in that great light? And how
can we go without you, if you are the one who has to talk?”
“I’m not going,” said Lucia.
“Well, I’m going.” Francisco was very positive.
“And so am I,” added Jacinta, “because that Lady told us to.”
Later the boy found Lucia at the threshing floor and made a final
effort to persuade her.
“Look, you’re going tomorrow?”
“I’m not going. I told you I’m never going any more.”
“Don’t you see it can’t be the devil? God is already so sad
over so many sins, and now if you don’t go, He will be sadder.”
“I tell you I’m not going!” 4
Lucia held to this determination. Maria Rosa, who had her own
ways of knowing what was happening, must have been relieved
that night. And on the following morning she could hardly dis¬
guise her satisfaction when she noticed that her youngest daughter
still had no intention of taking the sheep to Cova da Iria.
It was only when the time approached to turn them loose that
Lucia felt a sudden desire to see Jacinta and Francisco. Running
to the Marto cottage, she found them both kneeling beside a bed,
weeping desolately.
“Aren’t you going?” she demanded.
“We don’t dare go without you!” they wailed.
“Well, I’ve changed my mind, and I’m going.”
They arose with great joy. Francisco said they had been praying
for her all night.
“Vamosl” Off they went by the zig-zag paths they knew so
4 Memoir IV, p. n.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGwG-kfZZZRxFOI2mLOy2-MNsiK87_qGC5qSo58x-xfQZTZatk90T90niOsNhtYxnUEAXma1b0w-c8tKaaqEho3t2cF8XHNWhBxcyjRYdb7jJY-fUpGSoLOJJqrEny28-KmFN4caQ=w491-h810-v0
79 Our Lady of Fatima
well across the two and a half miles of dusty terrain between
Aljustrel and the Cova. It was the month of the Precious Blood
of Our Lord; and July in that part of Portugal can be oppressively
hot. As noon approached, a sultry stillness settled over the fields
where the sparse hay had already been cut and stacked in tight
bundles around the trunks of the olive trees. Sweating men and
boys, who had been digging the first little round potatoes from
the red soil with great pronged hooks, began to steal away early
for their siestas. Trees loaded with ripe plums were sagging visibly,
cabbages along the roadside were drooping and wilting. Occasional
sounds like the chirping of cicadas, the thwacking of flails on
some farm in the resonant valley below Cabe^o, or the squeaking
of a cart on the glaring road, had a strange exaggerated quality
that was startling. The oxen and sheep seemed almost too oppressed
to thrust -their noses into the muddy water of the Lagoa. A few
darkly clad women, and an old man or two passed silently over
the fields or down the highway under great black umbrellas. The
sky was a huge blue glare of light, the dry air, unmoistened by rain
for many weeks, was hard to breathe.
Yet on this particular thirteenth of July, in 1917, there was
something unusual afoot in all the villages and fields of the Serra.
Even before the children arrived within sight of the Cova da
Iria they must have become aware of it. For all over the mountains
and beyond people had been hearing, by the mysterious grapevine
that disperses news so thoroughly and so fast in country places,
of what had taken place on the feast of Saint Anthony. An astonish¬
ing number had made up their minds to be on hand for the next
apparition. Maria Carreira had come again from Moita, bringing
her crippled son, her incredulous husband, and all her daughters.
Among the most fervent believers was another resident of Moita,
one Jose Alves, who had told the Prior of Fatima to his face that
hi^ theory about diabolical intervention was all nonsense. For
who had ever heard of the devil inciting people to pray?
When Ti Marto arrived (for he had decided to take the day
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG5qiUFxzoN0ZK89aIttzc_CNPhoSBN3hgrQKA8A-2zMeabXnZqaVlJRKbwiuUkzCrZPM3Ktk1FiZFVJT0JZnqksdNsa9mf7QRVhM61ohDP1Nd3HUIA51SvW0wsvL5oSdCrRQ_jrA=w491-h810-v0
8o Our Lady of Fatima
off and see what his children were up to), the crowd was so dense
that it took him a long while to elbow his way through to where
Jacinta stood with Francisco and Lucia. Portuguese crowds are
orderly and well behaved, as a rule, but this one troubled him a
little. “The power of the world!” he reflected philosophically. Ffe
still chuckles when he remembers some of the richly dressed and
adorned persons who had arrived “from who knows where,”
ladies in long skirts and wide-brimmed “picture” hats, gentlemen
with fancy vests, very high collars and derbies. Ti Marto found
them ridiculous. “ Ai, Jesus! There were fine gentlemen who came
to laugh and to make fun of people who didn’t know how to read
handwriting. But it was we who had the laugh on them. . . .
Ui! Poor little wretches! They didn’t have any faith at all. Then
how could they believe in Our Lady?” Most of the people, how¬
ever, were peasants of the Serra, the women generally barefoot,
with black shawls over their heads, the men wearing their Sunday
suits, and great hobnailed boots. And among them Ti Marto
encountered his wife and Maria Rosa.
It may be that his Olimpia had been listening to that last tense
conversation of the three children in the bedroom of her house.
For no sooner had they scampered away, all their sorrow turned
to relief, than she hurried to her brother’s house to tell Maria Rosa
what had occurred. “Ai, Jesus!” The heavens seemed once more
to be crashing down about the tired head of Lucia’s mother. After
all she had been through, to think that the silly cachopa was
going off to keep a tryst with the devil! Arming themselves with
some holy candles and a supply of matches, the two women started
for Cova da Iria, evidently with some notion of exorcising the
evil spirit if he should turn up there again. They were too late
to head off the children, if that was their intent; however, there
they were, clutching their candles and ready to light them if need
be. And with them were some 2,000 to 3,000 other persons, devout
or curious, waiting to see what v/ould happen.
The children, in the center of the throng, were now reciting
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFAZ77KaMB31la1d-YgZHI89FLxjMVl2IgIJ_FNu74wIob85Fpxmq8b1j7yqGUamrGcVEz-1QrNHZRadIY0lKZIKdykiUPFkiLgk17A1W_VYvBcN0o2i7iBTCCumxT2vZ08PiwDbQ=w491-h810-v0
the Rosary and gazing with expectancy toward the east. They
paid no attention to a rude woman who was berating them as
impostors. Jacinta and Francisco did not even see their father.as
he took his place beside them, ready to help them if necessary.
Ti Marto was looking at Lucia. Fler face had a deathlike pallor,
bde heard her say:
“Take off your hats! Take off your hats, for I see Our Lady
already!” Fde saw something like a small cloud descend upon
the azinheira; and suddenly, as the sunlight became dimmer, a
cool fresh breeze blew over the hot Serra. Then he heard something
that sounded to him, he says, “like a horse-fly in an empty
water-pot”; but neither he nor Maria Carreira nor any of the rest,
except the children, could distinguish any words.
By this time all the stimuli of the sensory world—the crowd,
the sun, ■ the breeze, all the trivialities of space and time—had
fallen away from the three young mystics as some supernatural
force descended upon and drew them up into that white radiance
where once more with inexpressible joy they saw the Lady glide
to the top of the little tree.
“Vocemece que me quere?” asked Lucia as before. “What do
you want of me?”
“I want you to come here on the thirteenth day of the coming
month, and to continue to say five decades of the Rosary every
day in honor of Our Lady of the Rosary to obtain the peace of
the world and the end of the war. For She alone will be able
to help.”
Lucia said, “I wish to ask you to tell us who you are, and to
perform a miracle so that everyone will believe that you have
appeared to us!”
“Continue to come here every month,” answered the Lady. “In
October I will tell you who I am and what I wish, and will perform
a miracle that everyone will have to believe.”
Here Lucia thought of some requests that various people had
asked her to present. “I don’t remember just what they were,”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF05VsheXGLLH735N1Bb1B1Bm4V3LmehvqLRiB9QfZFqM3xfhdNGwzfSk7hJh-FPRw3Y4Ina0baY8WBo8v0m9RaWfcidntH9M-q-XqCzVX5yOpVB41ubDbj68M_zeSbhfA9kSaCRQ=w491-h810-v0
she wrote in 1941. But it is believed that one of them was for
the cure of Maria Carreira’s crippled son; and the Lady is said to
have answered that she would not cure him, but would give him
a means of livelihood if he would say his Rosary every day. What
Lucia now recalls is her insistence on the daily use of the beads to
gain graces during the year.
“Sacrifice yourselves for sinners,” she repeated, “and say many
times, especially when you make some sacrifice:
“ ‘O Jesus, it is for your love, for the conversion of sinners and
in reparation for the sins committed against the Immaculate Heart
of Mary.’
As the Lady spoke the last words, she opened her lovely hands
as before, and poured down from them the revealing and pene¬
trating radiance that had warmed the hearts of the children on
the previous occasions. But this time it seemed to pass into the
earth, disclosing beneath—and these are Lucia’s words, written in
1941—“a sea of fire; and plunged in this fire the demons and
the souls, as if they were red-hot coals, transparent and black or
bronze-colored, with human forms, which floated about in the
conflagration, born by the flames which issued from it with clouds
of smoke, falling on all sides as sparks fall in great conflagrations
—without weight or equilibrium, among shrieks and groans of
sorrow and despair which horrify and cause to shudder with fear.
“The devils were distinguished by horrible and loathsome forms
of animals frightful and unknown, but transparent like black coals
that have turned red-hot.” 5
The children were so frightened that they would have died,
they felt, if they had not been told they were all going to heaven.
After gazing in fascinated horror at the gruesome spectacle which
not even Saint Teresa has described more fearfully, they raised
their eyes as if in desperate appeal to the Lady who stood gazing
down on them with sombre tenderness.
“You see hell, where the souls of poor sinners go,” she said
5 Memoir IV; also III, in almost the same words.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEh6AATnZEtX0pgnNkkBiAUHKmaMkUQp6Ws4yHEpz7RLdwlscRrpm29X7rVKZ2gy7ZLG_dYRyMpaatKpfDJGibZfml1TJ-piwH0G58VZNE20SIV-BUMG5kHq4e8gMFj3G_dqis8=w491-h810-v0
at length. “To save them God wishes to establish in the world
the devotion to my Immaculate Heart. If they do what I will tell
you, many souls will be saved, and there will be peace. The
war is going to end. But if they do not stop offending God, another
and worse one will begin in the reign of Pius XI.
“When you shall see a night illuminated by an unknown
light, know that it is the great sign that God gives you that He
is going to punish the world for its crimes by means of war,
of hunger, and of persecution of the Church and of the Holy
Father.
“To prevent this I come to ask the consecration of Russia to
my Immaculate Heart and the Communion of reparation on the
first Saturdays. If they listen to my requests, Russia will be con¬
verted and there will be peace. If not she will scatter her errors
through the world, provoking wars and persecutions of the Church.
The good will be martyrized, the Holy Father will have much to
suffer, various nations will be annihilated.* * * * 6
“In the end my Immaculate Heart will triumph. The Holy
Father will consecrate Russia to me, and a certain period of peace
will be granted to the world.
“In Portugal the dogma of the Faith will always be kept.
“Tell this to no one. Francisco, yes, you may tell him.
“When you say the Rosary, say after each mystery, ‘O my
Jesus, pardon us and deliver us from the fire of hell. Draw all
souls to heaven, especially those in most need.’ ” 7
The Lady then told the children a final secret which has never
been revealed, and which Lucia will not disclose until the Queen
of Heaven herself commands her to do so. She has never told it
even to her confessors.
8 Explaining this to me in July, 1946, Sister Maria das Dores (Lucia) made the
prophecy even more specific, saying that Our Lady desired that Russia (not “the
world” as in many inaccurate accounts) be consecrated to her Immaculate Heart
by the Pope and all the bishops in the world on one special day. If not, every
country in the world without exception will be chastised “by the errors of Russia.”
7 An erroneous form of this prayer, limiting it to the souls in purgatory, is current
in the United States.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEGiAhdrd2WnLGghvGIDjsA_7oa1fL4zMktaeobXEZXGu65SCoRPoao4i4AwUHrFU11Zh2-t_f6USmzjPOHosKiE0Y9Q1uSU_OHpFKxyXKyRLSKD144UwALkp3ZtgGKY4L-FWc5EQ=w491-h810-v0
In the long moment of silence that followed, the crowd seemed
to sense the apocalyptic solemnity and tenseness of a communication
on which hangs, perhaps, the fate of the entire human race. Not a
sound could be heard anywhere. The children, the crowd, the wind,
all were silent as death. Finally Lucia, as pale as a corpse, ventured
to ask in her high thin voice:
“Do you want nothing more of me?”
“No, today I want nothing more of thee.”
With a last affectionate but overpowering glance, the Lady passed
as usual toward the east—so Lucia concludes the tremendous story
of the third apparition-—-“and disappeared in the immense distance
of the firmament.”
As the children left off gazing eastward and stared, wan and
shaken, at one another, the people began to press around them, all
but suffocating and trampling them in their eagerness to ask all
manner of questions.
“What did she look like?” “What did she say?” “Why do you
look so sad?” “Is it the Blessed Virgin?” “Will she come again?”
“It’s a secret,” said Lucia. “It’s a secret.”
“Good or bad?’’
“Good for some, for others bad.”
“And you won’t tell us?”
“No, sir. It’s a secret and the Lady told us not to tell it.”
Ti Marto picked up his daughter Jacinta, and elbowed his way
to the edge of the crowd, the child clinging to his neck. Stragglers
followed them, still pelting them with questions. And Lucia and
Francisco kept saying:
“It’s a secret. It’s a secret.”
Someone offered to take them home in an automobile. Ti Marto
consented, and the children rode for the first time in one of the
strange horseless monsters they had seen occasionally rumbling
along the road from Ourem to Leiria. They were not in a mood to
enjoy a new experience. But they were grateful for the ride, for all
three were exhausted.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHC2Z8qfwx7ypJEUA8fGCyHTuNn_RKymqUuYznOXU5qdALhNUsfo_AAgAxMZCBpQtm8Ra7iz8wmMewxCDpaF2j1XuRLolGeLXjY3kymxvCYlUNXEVLROHlet9Ntxa7YnOsvyvyp6Q=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER IX
Everybody in Portugal seemed to have heard the news from
Fatima. Catholic diocesan papers began to publish short articles in
which a note of prudent reserve was evident; the headline of the one
in The Ouriense of Ourem, for example was, “Real Apparition or
Supposed Illusion.” More generous with its space if not with its
approval, was a secular press almost wholly and openly devoted to
the anti-Catholic revolution. Editors of the Jacobin tradition of 1789
flatly accused the clergy, and particularly the Jesuits, of having
invented the story to regain the prestige they had lost in the
Revolution of 1910. The anti-clerical O Seculo, chief daily of Lisboa,
printed a sarcastic and distorted account on July 21, under the
heading, “A Message from Heaven—Commercial Speculation?”
Liberals of a more moderate tinge wrote suavely of psychosis,
epilepsy and collective suggestion as possible explanations of the
incredible tale from the Serra da Aire. A casual reader of the daily
press might have concluded that the net result thus far had been to
provoke a new and bitter attack upon the Church.
If the illiterate children of Aljustrel and their families were
spared from all this, they could not escape so easily from hordes of
pilgrims, devotees, relic-hunters and mere sensation-seekers that
broke in more and more upon their peace. Some they were sorry for
:—poor wretches shattered by want or sorrow or some incurable
disease, who often walked barefoot over great distances, sometimes
completing the last mile on bleeding knees, to ask their prayers for
some favor, some cure from the Holy Virgin. They found it more
difficult to be patient with some of the rich and well-fed persons,
fashionably dressed and sporting furs and jewels, who would appear
suddenly in carriages or even in automobiles, some from as far as
Porto or Lisboa, either to beg some boon from heaven—for not
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHQIPHfjtMix3KMplK7mY8_SlfzwAKf0vPD33pqUsZVqHlkz_B6X5xh3pVTxrWbp-OJuuOZ0lNO3mlrvDzFPMyh2IOxsLAd3KJTftnrAtffJhwxcxbWd1Zypj6_c38luL3oySKohw=w491-h810-v0
even the rich are satisfied!—or to divert themselves with a new
marvel. Ti Marto remembers them well. “What questions they
would ask! Ai Jesus! Some of them were terrible. ‘Did Our Lady
also have goats and sheep when she was a little girl?’ ‘Did Our Lady
ever eat potatoes?’ What questions! It was a scandal, that’s what it 1 >» 1
was!
Francisco, like his father, resented the smug complacent stupidity
of the nabobs, and all the inquisitions and caresses to which they
subjected him. One day he turned on Jacinta, boylike, and said,
“It’s too bad you didn’t keep quiet! Then nobody would know it.
If it wasn’t a he,” he added regretfully, “we could tell all the people
we saw nothing, and that would be the end of it.”
After a while they began to develop a certain skill in avoiding
bores of the sleek and curious variety, who were so hard to shake off.
They could tell them at a glance from a distance. One day they
saw a group of fine ladies and gentlemen getting out of a motor
car on the road from Aljustrel to Fatima. There was no doubt
what they were, but it was too late to escape: the ladies had
already seen them and were approaching with smiles only too
familiar.
“Where do the little shepherds live? The ones that saw Our
Lady?”
The children gave the most precise directions to their homes.
The visitors thanked them, and went on down the hill, while the
three, giggling with triumph, tumbled over the wall and ran to hide
among the olive trees behind the Abobora cottage.
“We must always do this!” said Jacinta with great satisfaction.
There were many priests among the pilgrims at this period. And
most of them, despite the accusations of the anti-clerical press, were
skeptical and even hostile. Priests trained in theology were well
aware of the harm that fraud or delusion might do the Church, and
could ask a thousand clever questions that would never occur to
1 De Marchi, p. 104.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHl1fC9rsKBOfks8I3kHz9lNiTmnBTeH6W8zuC6etQzfrpeIY_6cVxOxoGDx9IhDWw7um0nXYqwoLIVZSlfCEBbIbc-Fjaf3I2GQXbaZj25vYPPW3sGM9SgfIfk6wzhWEyrRlYwjw=w491-h810-v0
one of the unbelieving skeptics. The mere sight of a black soutane
far down the road became a warning signal to be acted upon
instantly. “When we saw a priest coming, we always escaped if we
could,” wrote Lucia. “When we saw ourselves in the presence of a
priest, we prepared ourselves to offer to God one of our greatest
sacrifices.” ,
Fortunately there were exceptions. One of those they liked to
remember afterwards was the visit of the Jesuit Father Cruz, who
came all the way from Lisboa to investigate what he had heard.
Four years had passed since he had said to Lucia, at her first
confession, “My daughter, your soul is the temple of the Fioly
Spirit. Keep it always pure. ...” And though he was prematurely
old and bent almost double, he still went about, never carrying
money with him, preaching and directing souls, which he seemed
to read instantly with his small, shrewd benevolent eyes.2 After
questioning the children for some time, he persuaded them, as a
good detective might, to take him to the exact spot where they
had seen Our Lady, and to reenact for him all they had done and
said.
“On the way,” Lucia recalls, “we walked on each side of His
Reverence, who was mounted on an ass so small that his feet
almost dragged on the ground.” It was a long and painful journey
for him, and a tedious one, perhaps, for them, but it was worth
while, for he came away convinced that they had told the
truth. He taught them many ejaculatory prayers that proved use¬
ful and consoling. And from that day on he was their cham¬
pion.
Unfortunately this did not effect the conversion of Lucia’s family.
They had been more unsympathetic than ever since the apparition
of July 13. Previously her father had shrugged off the whole affair
with some muttering about “women’s tales.” But he had passed
2 He is still doing this at the age of eighty-six. I met him by happy chance on a.
train between Lisboa and Santarem last summer. He told me he had given Lucia
her first communion.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEkKat-RQ1PKS2HUZTiny3kN3UPgajZ6uoziP3pbIwq8kSW2TtRgJS14QUu5V1YQ59gnepkK5FCUKClhKtC2LHjTklo6Kaaf68Eb2s9LomcSW8J5MjLiyV-M6-eAkvbH9-6sVRf=w491-h810-v0
88 Our Lady of Fatima
from neutrality to open hostility on the day when he went to
inspect his vegetable gardens at Cova da Ina, and saw what the
crowds had done to them. Thousands of feet had packed the soil
so hard that there was no sense cultivating it any more; horses
had eaten or trampled his cabbages, beans and potato vines; all
his labor had been wasted. Antonio grumbled and fumed, and
drank more copinhos than ever.
The rest of the family also had a new weapon to brandish over
the head of poor Lucia. She and her visions had brought them all
to the verge of starvation. When she was hungry, her sisters would
say, “Go and eat what you find growing at Cova da Ina!” Or
Maria Rosa would cry, “Yes, ask that Lady to give you something
to eat! You made all the people go to Cova da Iria. Get your food
there.”
“We didn’t make them go,” said loyal Jacinta from the door¬
way. “They went there themselves!”
But Maria Rosa felt too strongly to listen to reasoning. There
were days when Lucia feared to ask her for so much as a piece
of bread, and went to bed hungry.
From time to time her mother would take her to the Prior for
another interrogation, hoping each time that he would find a
way to break her stubborn will. At the end the good man always
shook his head and said, “I don’t know what to say about all
this.” No wonder Maria Rosa still doubted, when a man, so learned,
confessed that he could make nothing of it.
It was only at Cabego or Valinhos or on the hills near Cova da
Iria that Lucia could find any peace or solace at all. And even
there the discussions of the three had taken on a sombre and more
thoughtful tone since the breath-taking revelations of July 13.
The fires of hell, the damnation of many souls, a second world
war with millions of people starving, homeless, tormented, butch¬
ered, tumbling unprepared into eternity—how could the world
ever look the same to childish eyes after Divine Wisdom had
disclosed to them such horrors! The two girls could think of
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFDhLiGR7XjgMYa8jddj706wTHyI1_l1fOVWzYq-H-Za83SGbP9fyfyQPa32Zysks_x9YOjtiRNnsHa3KdnLEm6Au1Mwc337GQbPoYOxpMTBMRagJMHRsj_LGJ6kNTEu1gjdFwoHg=w491-h810-v0
nothing else. Francisco, for some reason, was much less shaken
by the experience. Instead of brooding on the countless souls he
had seen rising and falling like sparks in the flames under the
taunts of fallen angels, he would fix his thoughts upon God, upon
His goodness and His glory.
“How wonderful God is!” he would cry ecstatically. “There is
no way to say it. All you can say is, that nobody can say it! But
isn’t it too bad that He is so sad! If I could only console Him!”
Jacinta did not find it so easy to put out of mind the horror of
eternal death. If a world war could be both incredible and painfully
real, so much the more so was hell. But what does a child of
seven know of the enormity of sin? She was shocked, profoundly
puzzled. A few days after the apparition of July she sat for a long
time on a stone, reflecting deeply while the sheep munched the
withered' grass and furze. Finally she said:
“That Lady said that many souls go to hell. What is hell?”
“It is a pit full of worms and a very big bonfire,” replied Lucia,
perhaps quoting her mother, “and people go there who commit
sins and don’t confess them, and they stay forever and burn.”
“And never get out any more?”
“No.”
“Not after many, many years?”
“No. Hell never ends. And heaven doesn’t either. Whoever
goes to heaven never gets out of it, and whoever goes to hell
doesn’t either. Don’t you see that they are eternal, because they
never end?”
Jacinta found this concept of endlessness at once baffling and
tantalizing. She could never put it wholly out of mind. Often in
the midst of some game she would stop suddenly and say:
“But look here, doesn’t hell end even after many, many, many
years r
“No.”
“And those people who have to burn there never die? Never?
And they never turn into ashes? And if people pray a great deal
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFWXIoUWE4t0GuIo_tb8h9LE1FqmyyXy5etPjRBQJT772xxq3W9UScc50T3ovwss9uLFso0Bso8tlWy8Ng8MsNTDBi6FKA5iRwnVF6vJnX0yAqMJWWvmfomNp7HzoGmsmvog11lJw=w491-h810-v0
9°
for sinners, Our Lord will save them from that? And with sacri¬
fices too? Poor we have to pray and make many sacrifices for
them!”
Then, when the thought of the burden of sin became almost
unbearable, she would remember the consolation that had been
granted with it.
“How good that Lady is! Yes, she has promised to take us to
heaven!”
Jacinta was too unselfish to be able to dwell long or complacently
on her own good fortune when there were so many others who
would never share it. To her the sight of gehennah was like a
gate opening upon a steep road of asceticism. “I think I would lay
down a thousand lives to save one soul of the man I saw being
lost,” wrote Saint Teresa of Jesus after a similar experience; and
the little serrana of Aljustrel was so stricken with the same noble
pity that she acquired a thirst for penance to which Lucia could
apply only the word “insatiable.” Other Christians accepted hell
on faith, because Christ had said repeatedly and with solemn
emphasis that there is a hell, but Jacinta had seen it; and once
she grasped the idea that God’s justice is the counterpart of His
mercy, and that there must be a hell if there is to be a heaven,
nothing seemed important to her except to save as many souls
as possible from the horrors she had glimpsed under the radiant
hands of the Queen of Heaven. Nothing could be too hard, nothing
too small or too great to give up.
“Eat, Jacinta.”
“No, I will offer this sacrifice for poor sinners who eat too much.”
“Drink, Jacinta.”
“No, this is for those who drink too much.”
She would say suddenly to Lucia, “I am sorry for you. Fran¬
cisco and I are going to heaven, but you stay here alone. I will
ask Our Lady to take you to heaven! But she wants you to stay
here for a while! When you see the war, don’t be afraid—in
heaven I will be praying for you.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGpKTUTFe4bM-KpPc0fghDw0BUYluQKesgySuC9rFgx3XLMX-Aa02FDxMxayzKVzzINwOxPkADxqL2DO1_coLVdiw9uxn7jE42Ro137R-ODGvi9byT-kYng2QtNYjA5VS-eBxJh=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 91
More and more, however, she brooded on the lost souls.
“Jacinta, what are you thinking of?” asked Lucia one day.
“Of that war that is going to come, and of so many people
who are going to die and go to hell. What a pity there must be
a war and they must go to hell because they won’t stop sinning!”
Time and again this thought recurred with sickening impact.
She would say, with a look of terror, “Hell! Hell! How sorry I
am for the souls that are going to hell!” Then she would fall
on her knees, clasp her hands and repeat over and over the
prayer Our Lady had taught them to add to each decade of the
Rosary:
“O my Jesus, pardon us, save us from the fire of hell, draw
all souls to heaven, especially those in most need!”
One day after she had been thus long upon her knees, she
called:
“Francisco! Francisco, are you going to pray with me? It is
necessary to pray a great deal to save souls from hell. So many
are going there! So many!” And they said the prayer again
together, for those who said no prayers.
“Why doesn’t Our Lady show hell to sinners?” demanded
Jacinta one day. “If they saw it, they would never sin again,
so they wouldn’t go there. You must tell that Lady to show hell
to all those people. You will see how they will be converted!”
Poor Jacinta! It seemed so simple. Perhaps she had not yet heard
the parable of Dives and Lazarus. “If they will not listen to
Moses and the prophets, neither would they believe were one
to rise from the dead.” 3 She was silent for a moment. Then
she said:
“Why didn’t you tell that Lady that she ought to show hell
to those people?”
“I forgot.”
“So did I,” said the younger child sadly.
3 St. Luke XVI, 31.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFoAjyouqG5iZwR5X2_NnRMiMjYxOmcz7UizmuPeEuzy0ObPzRHE8bjxW29286bkYAomjsYXlxuhhuGn_doBn4cyNjLEtd2QDN2NaSHRwsYx_AFl-YzcmzvWmpPPLvHY3V0rzkajg=w491-h810-v0
92 Our Lady of Fatima
“What sins are they that those people do,” she asked one day,
“to have to go to hell?”
“I don’t know.” Lucia, after all, was not much older than her
cousin. “Perhaps the sin of not going to Mass on Sunday, of
stealing, of saying wicked words, cursing people, swearing.” 4
“And only for one word they can go to hell?”
“Well, it’s a sin! Let them keep quiet and go to Mass.”
“Oh, if I could only show them hell!” She reflected a few
moments, then said, “If Our Lady lets you, tell all the people
what hell is, so that they will commit no more sins and not go
there.”
Another time she said, in horror, as if she still saw the vision
before her, “So many people falling into hell! So many people
in hell!”
“Don’t be afraid!” Lucia tried to reassure her. “You are going
to heaven.”
“Yes, yes, I’m going. But I want all those people to go there I ’>
too!
Jacinta’s round cheeks were beginning to look drawn and hollow,
her black eyes to glow like those that peer into other worlds than
ours. And like many other friends of God, she had already begun,
in August, to have prophetic visions. Some of the most gruesome
scenes of the Second World War passed through the mind of this
child of seven almost a quarter of a century before they were
enacted upon the roads of France or Holland, or in the ruins of
London or of Frankfort.
One hot day when they had been sitting on the rocks at Cabego,
lazily watching the listless sheep below, she suddenly prostrated
herself and uttered the prayer the angel had taught them:
“My God, I believe, I adore, I hope, and I love you! I beg
pardon of You for those who do not believe, do not adore, do
not hope, and do not love You!”
4 Lucia’s impression is that most souls are lost through “sins of the flesh.” She
believes that Our Lady revealed this to Jacinta in 1920.—III, p. 5.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHPr0PJ_T594T7jdvS-oqqeBuaDp20jyNIj-SNCxfRJsy1VlW0hpcDDNfroGp8PcZjdpIAMlPLRdPHWxNppzn1TwLHgWfgVzP2cvQfaAJtUeP4tI6ausH19HFbq7LWW7UAAvFq6=w491-h810-v0
A profound silence followed. Then the little girl said to Lucia:
“Don’t you see such a long street, so many roads and fields full
of people weeping with hunger, and they have nothing to eat?
And the Holy Father in a church before the Immaculate Heart
of Mary, praying? And so many people praying with him?”
Possibly this referred to the consecration of the world to the
Immaculate Heart by Pope Pius XIP'in 1542. But there was much
more about the Pope, or a Pope, in the visions of Jacinta, and she
was so disturbed that she wanted to tell everybody, so that all
good Christians would pray unceasingly for him.
“Can I say that I saw the Holy Father and all those people?”
she asked.
“No,” answered Lucia. “Don’t you see that that makes part of
the secret? And that then it will be discovered?”
“All right. I won’t say anything, then.”
Nevertheless, Jacinta continued to worry constantly about this
future Pope. One very hot afternoon, when even the sheep were
nodding in their shelter, the three children were sitting under the
olive trees on the stone slabs that covered the well behind the
house of Antonio Abobora. Francisco became restless and began
to look for some wild honey among the flowers that grew in a
little bramble thicket near by. Lucia was soon doing likewise.
Jacinta remained sitting on the edge of the well, staring into
space. Presently they heard her say:
“Don’t you see the Holy Father?”
“No.”
“I don’t know how it is, I see the Holy Father in a very large
house, on his knees before a table, with his hands over his face,
crying. In front of the house there are many people, and some
are throwing stones at him, others are cursing him and saying
very foul words to him. Poor little Holy Father! We must pray
a lot for him!”
Who was this Vicar of Christ that Jacinta saw stoned by a mob?
There is a story in Portugal that Lucia has reason to believe that
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGLzEc1sX_ZVhtPBQXB53-3OE3yu8dHen5NhMZMEd4vrP5RhVlHAxyGR8CZjRXEz9A4qhRBUDcUk66c2COa30m6PercqTsVogF8UtWpBuSbYRGqX4zdxG8yQXzj0QEkXkRzWsy4xQ=w491-h810-v0
it may be Pope Pius XII. She assured me that Jacinta did not
indicate any particular Pope—“just a Pope.” But he was a very
real one to her.
Going to the Marto house one day, Lucia found her sitting
alone, still and very pensive, gazing at nothing. “What are you
thinking of, Jacinta?”
“Of the war that is going to come. So many people are going
to die. And almost all of them are going to hell. Many houses
are going to be knocked down, and many fathers will be dead.
Look, I am going to heaven, and when, some night you see that
light that that Lady told us would come before it, you go there
also.”
“Don’t you see that nobody can run away and go to heaven?”
“It is true, you can’t. But don’t be afraid. In heaven I must
pray a great deal for you! And for the Holy Father. And for
Portugal, so the war won’t come here. And for all the priests.”
In her simplicity Jacinta would say, “I wish I could see the
Holy Father. Why doesn’t he come here, if so many other people
can come?”
Lucia explained how far Rome was, and what a busy man the
Pope must be. With a world war going on, and a devotion to the
Immaculate Heart to establish, and Russia to be converted so that
the world might have peace, it was quite possible that he had
not even heard of Aljustrel.
Jacinta took seriously the apostolate that had come to her. Persons
who spoke with her found themselves turning a little more to
prayer. Ti Marto and his wife had somewhat neglected the
Rosary. Jacinta told them Our Lady wanted every family to say
it together every day. After some insistence on her part they
resumed the old custom, and began to like it. It was hard to
resist Jacinta, she wds so earnest, so persistent, h et most days
she seemed as light-hearted as ever as she followed the sheep in
the August sunshine. Sometimes she would dance and play games
while they grazed. Or as she went about picking blue flowers or
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFUMlFl8t_yqbZgWCWadx3TI0GT4jGNfdXXKHqihWBanaZi0qndvr_Rpuwf_WkQ8IA0RDDYao0PWJEI2z3Z51MvqepVNMPJZ15IwsVXu-7zp5bJaKIkj7nllfUOB1Z2B23Z09IYEQ=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 95
chasing white butterflies, she would make up little songs to some
of the brief prayers that Father Cruz had taught her. Passers-by
would hear something like “Jesus, I love you! Immaculate Heart
of Mary, save the poor sinners!” floating over the moors in a clear
high voice that seemed to summon from another world melodies
never before heard in this one.
There was a certain brooding sadness, though, under her gaiety,
as if she knew what lay at the end of the road she had taken.
Perhaps it was one of the first and surest signs of the validity
of the spiritual experiences of these three shepherd children that
the world, which had persecuted Christ and His saints, was already
resentful of their work, and ready to avenge itself upon them
in one way or another. The anti-clerical press continued to jibe
and grumble. In fact its indignation had reached the point where
rhetoric ■ flowers into rank political action. A few days before the
thirteenth of August, when people all over Portugal were wonder¬
ing whether there would be another apparition at Cova da Ina,
Ti Marto and Antonio Abobora received formal notices from the
Administrator of the Council of Ourem, head of the district to
which Fatima and Aljustrel belonged, ordering them to present
their children, the ones who had disturbed the public peace so
notoriously, at the town hall of that city for trial, at the hour of
twelve noon on Saturday, August n, 1917.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHGTHfq0ShmVxdgk12kj_WgOvaJEQeCfEJojMj6MV1QHOo7_bNh0m7E9kz7wOs8pWX9iQxqpVYRJQLSkk3hBOZTAhEp2gP2D_yVyIJl8q1lb0p8jtHI71eIpSYoJBdSF19-xAQH_g=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER X
The Administrator of Ourem at that time was Arturo de Oliveira
Santos, by trade a blacksmith, by temperament both an idealist
and a materialist. If his idealism had prevailed, if he had been
able to place his zeal, his imagination and his tenacity of purpose
at the service of the Church, he might conceivably have become
a bishop, a missionary, even a saint. For some obscure reason he
had chosen early in life to follow his own impulse and his own
interest. Yet there was something in his nature that found it im¬
possible to love the naked and searing form of materialism; like
most human beings he had to veil that terrible figure with some
rags of principle before he could take it to his heart. The draperies
were supplied him gladly by the leaders of that Revolution which
for centuries has been maneuvering to place the Church of Christ
in the state of siege in which she now stands in Europe. Thus
inevitably he became a devout and tireless member of what might
be called the Mystical Body of This World. “Mystical?” Yes.
For the invisible head of a kingdom devoted to uprooting the work
of Christ must obviously be the disfranchised spirit of revolt of
whom He said, “The prince of this world cometh, and in Me
he hath not anything,” and of whose followers He remarked
ironically, “The children of this world are wiser in their generation
than the children of light.”
As one of those wise children of the flesh, Arturo had logically
set out, as a young iron worker, to cultivate all persons and insti¬
tutions that might help him reap the fruits of the choice he had
made. At twenty-six he joined the Grand Orient lodge at Leiria,
under the very shadow of that Gothic ruin where Saint Isabel
had wept and prayed. He became indoctrinated with the esoteric
lore of a syncretistic and naturalistic religion which had been the
96
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEXrMK43p_7VXeDBnW_3q7keQAdEDmU8jcNeqNifrd9DGLGcRUBsnig0uQxtPCF5nKCOGvakFDt5skPwThU6961N1PZkpCcnVF3QByXbiPeWHR7zYApwKjDZLqVT5nc6JCUpswmgQ=w491-h810-v0
chief opponent of the Catholic Church in modern times, and which
already boasted that, by planning and carrying out the Portuguese
revolution of 1910, it had taken a long step toward the total
elimination of Christianity in the Iberian Peninsula. In 1911 the
Grand Orient chief, Magahaes Lima, was able to predict that in a
few years no young man would wish to study for the priesthood,
and Affonso Costa could assure all his brethren, and some dele¬
gates from the French lodges, that one more generation would
see the finish of “Catholicism, the principal cause of the sad
condition into which our country has fallen.” Indeed there was
much evidence to support the prediction if not the accusation. In
19x1 the new masters of Portugal seized Church property, scattered,
imprisoned and exiled hundreds of priests and nuns, and gave the
Cardinal Patriarch of Lisboa five days to leave that city, never to
return. Refugee priests and religious fled to France and elsewhere.
Some knelt at Lourdes and begged the Mother of God to help
their unhappy country, once proud to call itself her land, now
a spectacle of anarchy and unbelief, with a new revolution every
month.
Arturo de Oliveira Santos owed his success in life, such as it
was, to the miseries of the Church. Perhaps he had not intended
this. His wife seems to have been a Catholic of sorts, and all his
children had been baptized—though their names, “Democracia,”
“Republica,” “Libertade,” and so on, smdlled more of the lodge
than of the sacristy. Perhaps in a dim corner of his mind there
smouldered a vague hope of sending for a priest if he should ever
find the world slipping from under him and eternity yawning
beneath. But all was going his way when he moved his smithy,
which he called appropriately the Forge of Progress, to Ourem.
And having mastered the art of easy smiling and vigorous hand¬
shaking, the brisk and expansive affability so highly esteemed in
a world given to salutations in the marketplace and the first seats
at banquets, he had little difficulty in founding a new lodge there.
By 1917, when he was but thirty-three years old, he was its
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH7542UnypC9_lZsk199qH1Zio0mJKLgFfXPJ3DTmA8K9c3EU6jvAA5Ar6bmEtGf6hWmxs-T1MrsSJqYWERG58jCqlHgrK7j101Dj_pRT-feXRNAAiHGXJxqAgYfj3y-HYoFdyVDA=w491-h810-v0
President; and thanks to the mysterious brotherly bond of those
who walk through the shady labyrinth of degrees and initiations
to sunny places of honor, he was also President of the town
Administration and of the Chamber, and Deputy Judge of Com¬
merce—in short, he had become a sort of republican czar of the
whole district, including Fatima and Aljustrel. Fewer and fewer
went to Mass and to the sacraments; there were more divorces,
not so many children; and when he arrested six priests and held
them incommunicado for eight days, the leading Catholic laymen
in the Council and the Chamber were so busy making profitable
compromises that they did not have time to protest loudly enough
to be heard. To the blacksmith and his friends the fio-ht for
progress and enlightenment, as they preferred to describe their
conflict with the Church, was all but won.
What a challenge it must have been to the vigilance and zeal
of such a man to hear that two or three thousand of his people
had gone to Cova da Iria to hear a couple of children converse
with an invisible woman, and that other thousands everywhere
were talking of a new apparition of the Virgin! To such idealists
it was axiomatic that Mary belonged to the Middle Ages, and
had no place in modern life. She was part of the supernatural order
on whose grave so many earnest liberals and radicals had laid the
stone of unbelief. It was not to be tolerated that she should arise
from that darkness into the light of the twentieth century. The
whole Masonic press resounded with a clarion call against what
liberal editors called “an invasion of mysticism,” “a revival of
reaction and superstition,” “a wanton act of aggression on the
part of the clergy.” Moved to indignation by these and similar
protests, the Administrator of Ourem decided to take a firm stand.
Hence the order to the parents of the children to present them
for trial.
The two fathers reacted characteristically.
“There’s no sense in taking such young children before a court
of that kind,” said Ti Marto. “Besides, it’s three leagues, and
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGAHIoIFZZmSnCe-4tCSmyk25WpKb1rUDUZ-kWMufhxoxdixl7yP5Eef7W2fXSsym9fsi99IxZwNYM81TGPNfJrkzOfzHekEDcYN0LrLKcgRQjw9_vvLDxGe_NnQtp9bv_7fO44Zw=w491-h810-v0
99 Our Lady of Fatima
that’s too far for them to walk. And they don’t know how to
ride on a beast. I’m not going to do it. And I’ll go over and tell
the Administrator why.” Olimpia agreed that he was perfectly
nght: His brother-in-law, Antonio, was more complacent. “They can
arrange things to suit themselves over there,” he grumbled. “I
don’t know what it’s all about.” 1 He was inclined to agree with
his wife Maria Rosa that if Lucia was lying, it would be a good
thing to have her taught a lesson; while if by any chance she
was telling the truth—though they both doubted this—Our Lady
would take care of her.
Lucia heard these discussions and thought bitterly, “How differ¬
ent my father is from my uncle and aunt! They put themselves
in danger to defend their children, but my parents turn me over
with the greatest indifference, that they may do with me what
they will. But patience!” she argued with herself. “I expect to
have to suffer more for Thy love, O my God, and it is for the
conversion of sinners!” 2
On the morning of Saturday, August 11, her father set her on
the back of a burro, and they started up the hill. Stopping on the
way, they found Ti Marto getting himself a bite to eat, as uncon¬
cerned as ever; and he repeated, with emphasis, that he had no
intention of taking his young children before a court, for it was
all nonsense. However, he would go and speak for them, and
if Antonio was in a hurry, let him go ahead, and he would meet
him at Ourem. One of Ti Marto’s material advantages over his
brother-in-law was the ownership of a horse.
Lucia meanwhile had slipped off the burro and had gone to
look for Jacinta, whom she told, weeping, what had happened.
“Never mind,” said the little girl, though she was evidently
frightened. “If they kill you, you just tell them that I am like
you, and Francisco even more so, and that we want to die too.
1 Memoir I, p. 16.
2 Memoir II, p. 21.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQERWGXxBxRse47dYvDNhdl2xY9Z6VbYIuSPnqwycbTTu8dioljAdG1Y39MvDEgjAKNU0eb8CSehBud3byct8reQSW8JmeDUTKMfAfEmxTnK0qIqrme597yMb5bdnKjW6Qn-T3ja=w491-h810-v0
ioo Our Lady of Fatima
And now I will go with Francisco to the well to pray very hard
for you.” 3
They embraced again, tearfully, and parted. Lucia’s father put
her back on the burro. He walked stolidly along beside her, stalf
in hand. The small beast lurched and swung on the hot glaring
road. Now and then Antonio would give him a sharp command
or a blow on the flank to expedite his pace. The Administrator
was expecting them at twelve o’clock! The poor burrito did his
best; but something had to be sacrificed to speed, and Lucia fell
off three times in the course of the long journey. The road went
uphill and downhill, circling around many a bald slope irregularly
criss-crossed with stone walls or bristling with stunted pines. It
seemed to Lucia that they would never get there—yet it would
be too soon! She was bruised, aching, disheveled and unhappy
when at last they arrived in the ancient Moorish town.
Ourem lies sprawled along both sides of the main road, under
a terraced and cultivated lull crowned with the noble ruins of an
old castle thrust like a dark threat against a cobalt sky. Antonio
led the jouncing burrito over the cobblestones of the main street.
He knew where the Administration building was. It was closed,
however; not a soul was stirring anywhere about; the heat was
suffocating. He prodded the beast along to the marketplace, hoping
to find someone to direct him. There he saw the slight figure of
a man who had just dismounted from a horse. It was his brother-
in-law.
“Well, is everything settled?” asked Ti Marto jovially.
Settled! Antonio retorted somewhat hotly and profanely that
they had found the place shut and nobody there.
Ti Marto suggested that, as it was high noon, they had better
find something to eat before visiting the Administrator. They did
so, and returned at their leisure to the public building. They found
it still silent and unoccupied. Then a man came along who told
3 Memoir I, p. 16.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFGUCiijV_L6Sx69Y2b_qmkPgfeJLQWC5bWc3Vq2dfcU0oY0pq6jzL7J5sCO31TX6pZGHxeoIt1E4cgb8Vv17LgzXtCdFHQZMfw77H8Ne_46kHVaHqBmVrQ4JxADdHhTIF_YV898A=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima ioi
them that the Administration had moved to another house on
another street. A few minutes later they were standing in the
presence of the local cacique and several of his henchmen.
The dark nervous eyes of Arturo de Oliveira Santos took in the
three dusty figures.
“And the boy?” he asked abruptly.
“What boy?” So the Administrator did not know that there
were three children! Ti Marto played for time. He finally remem¬
bered that he had a son, but pretended that he had not under¬
stood that the great man wanted to see him.
“Besides, Senhor Administrator,” he added, “it is three leagues
from here to our country, and children can’t stand walking so
far, and they’re not safe on a horse or a burro, for they’re not
used to it.” v
So at least he now remembers the conversation. “And I had
a good mind to tell him something more: ‘Two children of that
age in court!’ But I kept quiet.” 4
Santos angrily berated him for his negligence, and Antonio for
for being late. Then he turned brusquely to Lucia. Had she seen
a lady at Cova da Iria? Who did she think it was? Was it true
that the lady had told her a secret? Well, then, Lucia must tell
the secret, and promise never to return to Cova da Iria.
Lucia looked straight ahead and said nothing.
“Will you tell me the secret?” he asked again.
“No.”
The Administrator glared at Antonio, who, sheepish and sleepy
as usual, had been standing with his hat in his hand, waiting.
“You there, do they believe these things over in Fatima?”
“Oh, no, sir!” said Lucia’s father. “All this is just women’s
tales.”
“And you, what do you say?” The Administrator was looking
at Ti Marto.
4 De Marchi, op. cit., p. iio.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHngYf3nucFeqXwjtjDbqdLehcuSMLT8jUrDu5GRq5NrGbn0YSyt4DMgAq4AalR4BcJNuXZ55Fx96yerWAkHlGU31mmahCXqmCIQ_B06dy1Xs3lg2g5vT4l52ZxXNhxABxEnH6B=w491-h810-v0
102 Our Lady of Fatima
“I am here at your command,” replied the father of Jacinta
and Francisco, “and my children say the same things I do/’
“Then you think it is true?”
“Yes, sir, I believe what they say.”
All the bystanders laughed heartily at this. Ti Marto regarded
them with unruffled composure. He was not afraid of these small
politicians. As for Santos, it was clear to him by this time that
nothing was to be gained by questioning these two clodhoppers
and their stolid eachopa, and he made a gesture of dismissal,
whereat one of his underlings told them all to be off.
The Administrator followed them to the door and said pointedly
to Lucia:
“If you don’t tell that secret, it will cost you your life!” 5
The frightened child glanced back at the dark frowning face
in the doorway. He looked as if he meant it.
It was late in the day when they got back to Aljustrel. Antonio
probably betook himself to the nearest tavern to recuperate from
the ordeal. Lucia slipped away from the reproachful questions and
censorious eyes of her mother and sisters to seek a few minutes
of peace at the old well. Francisco and Jacinta were kneeling there
on the stone slabs. Jacinta had kept her promise; they had been
there since morning.
“Ai, Lucia!” she cried, running to embrace her. “Your sister
told us they had killed you!”
One of the older girls had gone out to diraw some water, and
perhaps had dropped the remark as a jest. Francisco and his sister
had taken it seriously. Yet here was Lucia alive and free! They
all laughed and gamboled as the cool wind freshened the parched
fields, and the lamps of the angels began faintly to glitter.
The next day, August 12, was Sunday, but not a very quiet
one at Aljustrel. In every village of the Serra, in fact, there was
tense expectation regarding what might happen on Monday, and
B So ends Ti Marto’s account to Father De Marchi, pp. iio-m.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGCSwwfnMPMhvqbU-fpn1m-4LRJdOXBdBYzFPdeFh-dHds0ZF8nQ5MVvjB8B9ePc_oqRrCbpPnX1mK7-OB7b9N1Ik01sfSOCffwV-BtPI4enYwKyVJ4qIzZWpKOkq3-SvPzb9W3=w491-h810-v0
pilgrims were already on the march, whole families of peasants
with their wicker lunch baskets and earthenware water bottles,
some with blankets wrapped around their necks or packed on
their shoulders, to sleep in on the dry grass under the stars. All
day these poor wayfarers, and with them a scattering of more
prosperous ones in carriages and automobiles, kept arriving at
Aljustrel to visit the houses of Ti Marto and Antonio Abobora,
to ask questions, to take photographs, to tell the favors they
wanted from Our Lady on the morrow. Jobs, love, money, cures,
conversions, promotions—all the desires of the human heart were
poured out upon the three bewildered children. Maria Rosa was
almost beside herself. The insolence of these strangers! And the
iniquity of a girl who would cause such a commotion with her
lying tongue! At one stage of the confusion Lucia was tempted
to accept the invitation of an aunt from Cascais, who offered to
smuggle them all to her house and keep them there until the excite¬
ment had blown over. But they had promised Our Lady to be
at Cova da Ina August 13, and at Cova da Ina they would be.
' Toward evening the Abobora cottage was completely surrounded
by a noisy crowd. “In the hands of those people,” wrote Lucia,
“we were like a ball in the hands of a little girl. Each one pulled
us in his direction and asked his question, without ever giving
us tune to answer anybody.” In the midst of all this, who should
appear but three policemen from Ourem, to summon them to the
house of Ti Marto, where the Administrator in person was wait¬
ing, and to drop more than one dark hint that death might be
the penalty for further silence on their part.
“Never mind,” whispered Jacinta, tightening her pretty lips.
“If they kill us, so much the better, for then we will see Jesus
and Our Lady.”
In the interrogation which followed, Santos demanded the
secret and their promise not to return to Cova da Iria. When the
children refused on the ground that they could not disobey the
Lady, he took another tack and suggested, with unexpected affa-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGFtcKY_FtnBfTNr9Zn75aHLDKYc9lc4LdvfLZ2f6hd9WV2SNyR3JHz-MZ-qiTY-iG4782QiYRWDNHbiF3Z661TD0dq8h59crgsG8i8yLh45HzhYoBp7OV3uVOQVzXPmxwVerSTCQ=w491-h810-v0
;ic>4 Our Lady of Fatima
bility, that after all the man to look into matters of this sort was
the Senhor Prior, Father Ferreira. Ffe wanted to know whether
the parents of the little ones would have any objection to their
going to the rectory next morning before keeping their rendezvous
at Cova da Iria. Fatima, after all, was on the way to the place of
the apparition. It would take only a few minutes to see the Paroco.
With this he took his leave, amid general relief.
Early the next morning Ti Marto went out to do some hoeing
in a field near his house. The task finished, he returned and began
to wash the thick red soil off his hands, in preparation for his
breakfast. As he was doing this he noticed that his wife had come
into the house, and was making stealthy gestures to indicate that
he was wanted outside.
“All right, all right,” said Ti Marto, continuing to scrub his
great calloused hands.
Olimpia’s motions became more frantic.
“What’s the hurry?” asked her husband. “I’m coming.” And
in leisurely fashion he began to dry his hands. Before he could
finish, the door darkened, and looking up, he saw the Administrator
of Ourem glaring at him.
“Ah, so it’s you, Senhor Administrator?”
“It’s true. I also want to go to the miracle.”
Ti Marto’s heart gave a thump. There was something wrong
here, for all the geniality of the reply, and he noticed that Santos
looked nervous, and kept glancing about the cottage, now here,
now there, as he went on, rapidly:
“Let’s all go together. I will take the little ones with me in the
wagon. See and believe like Saint Thomas! Where are the children,
by the way? Time is getting on. You’d better have them called.”
“It isn’t necessary to invite them,” answered the other drily.
“They know when they have to fetch the cattle and get ready
tog°-”
Just then the children came in, and the Administrator, all smiles
and benignity, invited them to ride with him to Cova da Iria.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH6G4wEJL6ORp-ME8D_IxD_RpOreNzQnK-RJQWNsX3PI0s2AxZIzZSii_qD5XjqiaqbNsqdorJneUEm2hLeaXz3jvZT39szSs135e69OFPne90mXRI99q4hR4vygnDj1YuszF_N5A=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima io5
“No, thank you, Senhor,” said Francisco.
“We can walk all right,” added Jacinta.
“We’ll get there earlier this way, and you won’t be bothered
by people on the road.”
“Don’t put yourself out, Senhor Administrator.” It was Ti
Marto speaking. “They can get there all right.”
“Besides,” continued the official, “we’ll have more time to stop
at Fatima, at the house of the Prior. He wants to ask them some
questions, you know!”
As none of them could think of an answer to that, the children,
with many misgivings, piled into the wagon, Francisco sitting in
front with the Administrator, the two girls behind, while Ti Marto
and Antonio followed on foot. It was only a minute or two to the
church at the top of the hill. Arriving there, Santos dismounted,
and going up the rectory steps, shouted:
“First!”
“First what?” demanded Ti Marto, who had managed to keep
up with the wagon.
“Lucia!” called the Administrator peremptorily.
“Go ahead, Lucia,” said her uncle, and the child got out of
the wagon and entered the rectory.
“You can stay there for now,” added Santos to the younger
children.
The Prior was waiting in his study. It seems plain enough that
he had changed from a cautious and kindly reserve to something
like hostility. Perhaps he had been disturbed by the growing
notoriety of the affair and the opposition of the public authorities,
and wanted to spare the Church from further persecution at a
time when she was harassed and straitened enough.
“Who taught you to say the things that you are going about
sayfhg?” he inquired.
“That Lady whom I saw at Cova da Iria.”
The Prior’s face was severe.
“Anyone who goes around spreading such wicked lies as the
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG-XIv-WeE9938xizSnNFeSG0h8rhYYeBQoU79psvQWmq01e3tEwgk8AeJP1J2g08AhiS53qK2kLIAxLazTy0mqV4iG545Drb1e2knA1BzKlWEcCTfycjHGXg_jYVBbi_PZtGdtUg=w491-h810-v0
io6 Our Lady of Fatima
lies you tell will be judged, and will go to hell if it isn’t true.
More and more many people are being deceived by you.”
“If anyone who lies goes to hell, I will not go to hell,” said
the ten-year-old girl, looking him in the eyes, “for I don’t lie and
I tell only what I have seen and what the Lady has said to me.
And as for the crowd that goes there, they only go because they
want to. We don’t call anybody.”
“Is it true that that Lady confided a secret to you?”
“Yes, Senhor Prior.”
“Tell it, then.”
“I can’t tell it. But if Your Reverence wants to know it, I will
ask the Lady, and if she gives me permission, I will tell you.”
“Come,” interrupted the Administrator at this point, “these
are supernatural matters. Let us be going.” 8
With that he led Lucia outside, and brusquely ordered her
into the wagon. As the child obeyed, Santos jumped in after her,
seized the reins and cracked the whip.
Ti Marto and Antonio Abobora, wondering what was afoot
now, saw the beast turn sharply and bolt down the road, not
toward Cova da Ina, but in the opposite direction.
“You’re going the wrong way!” cried Lucia.
“It’s all right,” Santos assured her cheerfully. “We’ll stop and
see the Prior at Ourem a moment. Then I’ll take you to Cova da
Iria by automobile. You’ll be there in time!” and he threw some
blankets or mantles over the three children, to hide them from
the pilgrims who, in growing numbers, were trudging along the
road toward Cova da Ina.
When the wagon passed out of; sight in a cloud of fine white
dust, Ti Marto and his brother-in-law turned and followed the
people who were straggling along the highway toward the west.
Santos had said he would drive the children to Cova da Ina, and
Ti Marto may have assumed, with characteristic calm, that for
6 De Marchi gives this conversation, from the Canonical Process, op. cit., p. 114, n. 1.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGTr2ZIiXSXTkWbJDrH0kQJ3Uhtcqztj8sQ8Ovkxzwq8yoh45Qcg5RS63Z7C9yGHu80BYxkkAJItb6nlqE3Dz5c_A91-LAh5rUkhPmf9FJHJo1HUl10DLFQ6sGoLaazQ1aVKJjd=w491-h810-v0
some reason to be explained in due course the Administrator had
decided to go by another road. When the two men reached the
scene half an hour later, they were astonished to find more than
6,000 persons gathered there. Some had come walking barefoot for
three or four days, from distant villages, at enormous inconvenience,
to present their petitions to Our Lady; others had arrived on mules,
burros, horses, bicycles; a few in carnages, and some in automobiles.
All were asking where the children were, for it was close upon noon.
Some of them were frightened and ill at ease. They had been
told that there was a small extinct volcanic crater near Cova da Iria,
as in fact there was, and that it was all a trick of the devil to get these
good people in one place, and then have it open up and swallow
them in its fiery depths. Others scoffed at this fear. Maria Carreira
of Moita, for one, was not going to let such a threat keep her from
attending an apparition of Our Lady. In fact she had arranged a
table with flowers on it as a sort of altar or repository, and had
supervised the erection of a rustic arch, with some crosses tied to it,
and two hanging lamps to mark the spot at night. It seems
incredible, but Maria Rosa is said to have contributed something
toward these lamps; and her oldest daughter was helping to
arrange the arch and the table.
But where were the children?
About twelve o’clock some of those around the azinheira began
saying the Rosary, and gradually the whole throng joined in. Then
a faint murmuring sound was heard, followed by what seemed to be
a rumble of thunder—some thought in the road, others in the
little tree, still others in the far horizon. Here and there a frightened
cry was heard: “We are all going to die!” and a few ran away.
Most of them stood silent and rather fearful. Presently they saw a
flash of light, and then, far over their heads to the east, something
like a little cloud, frail, white, transparent, filmy, that floated slowly
down until it came to rest above the azinheira. A moment later it
rose again and melted away into the blue sky.
As the people stared at one another and all about in wonder and
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEBJVfMcETOF6ZPronnp7LZkdJ6186HDAVnyqAPz8f1G0faepVBd7xLPzERAaockT3uhjxLCswTP-l1tt8miCejhdZPI0v1TG85bQRbgCT-J_GgYekwt_HGDxDCc-1jDbeh3pNe=w491-h810-v0
surprise, many noticed a strange fact, to which Maria Carreira and
others testify even to this day: their faces were richly tinted with
the various colors of the rainbow, and even their garments were red,
yellow, blue, orange, and so on, while the foliage of the trees and
bushes seemed like brilliant flowers instead of leaves, and the dry
earth itself was checkered with different gorgeous hues. “There is
no doubt Our Lady had come,” says Maria Carreira, “but she didn’t
find the children.” And where were the little rascals? The question
was on all lips again.
Thus far Ti Marto and Antonio had said nothing about the odd
conduct of the Administrator. And now they saw some people
arriving with news that he had taken his prisoners first to the
Prior, and then to his own house at Ourem.
So the Administrator was the one who had spoiled the apparition,
and disappointed the Mother of God! And the Prior! The crowd
at once leaped to the conclusion that the two had conspired together
to frustrate them; and as the implications of this suspicion dawned
upon the tired minds of those who had walked so many miles to be
there, or had given up a day’s work and a day’s pay to do honor to
Our Lady, all the various emotions of reverence, fear, expectation,
affection, hope, and curiosity became fused by the subtle alchemy
of mob emotion into one tense vibration of human anger. The
whole assembly, as if congealed by indignation into a monster with
one mind and six thousand heads, burst into a shout of rage that
made the hot air tingle, and was heard as far away as Aljustrel,
more than two miles distant. Well for the Administrator, well for
the Prior, that they were not at Cova da Iria that moment; Father
Ferreira, at least, was convinced, as he wrote in a letter denying the
charge of collusion, that he would have been murdered on the spot.
Bitter voices began to wrangle and expostulate throughout the
mass. Some cried, “Down with the Administrator!” Another
yelled, “Down with the Prior!” For a moment it looked as if not
even distance would save the two from the hands of this self-
appointed court of hangmen, for such a mob is; and hundreds of
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGrpAAcZBH-B0MJGsKOfiiQS0KdH-qRPyGvJp7q91ToyKX5LDhUyBP2_01kKgtuFxnqwRlt5_EhHgPKuKnbBqQkkgRIiO_LN9j3DVaHzxRin8TGl20X9Cj0nIwDr9Jx7uGk6d9ADQ=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 109
the men, still roaring their grievance, began to move as mobs move,
' with a terrible purposeful unity, with glazed eyes that see nothing
but blood, and hands that grope for the necks of victims.
“To Fatima and settle with the Prior!”
“To Ourem and have it out with the Administrator!” shouted
another.
“And the Regidor!” added a third.
They might at least have got to Fatima, if not Ourem, had they
not come face to face with a little man of courage and presence of
mind, who raised his hand and spoke with an air of command.
“Boys, take it easy!” he cried. “Don’t hurt anyone! Whoever
deserves punishment will receive it. All this is by the power of the
One above!”
This is Ti Marto’s recollection of what he said that day. And
after a moment of hesitation the mob wavered, stopped, and began
to break up into groups.
Ti Marto makes very little of this. He was more concerned about
his children, and how he could get them out of the hands of their
captor.
“And I went home,” he concludes, “and found my wife
weeping.”7 /
7 De Marchi, p. 117.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF2wbvxjAES5PiEnckrdNesirkdmv8zkI5uY1YQEPqP2zl2DHJ4WdoY4MxkV10i63nrwoI-ZcwtsV3xryAJ5h78gIeBHgCp5duymoN0WVMV9h2eOAccJOwRvKngKyNNV3OpmCUMDQ=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER XI
If Ti Olimpia had reason to weep, the Administrator of Ourem
was highly pleased with the success of his bold plan to kidnap her
children. It gave him a certain sardonic pleasure to think of all the
silly pious people waiting at Cova da Iria for a show in which the
principal actors would not appear. And what a joke on the Prior!
Now his parishioners would believe that he was in league with the
forces of progress and enlightenment! He would never be able to
explain that away. Best of all, Santos had the three disturbers of the
peace locked up in a room in his house, and before they got out they
were going to tell him the secret, and reveal who or what was at
the bottom of the whole ridiculous piece of medievalism. He would
leave them alone for a while, and let terror do its work.
He was not wrong in calculating that the children would be
frightened. When the clocks of Ourem began, one after another,
to announce the hour of twelve with long and solemn strokes, they
exchanged looks of utter consternation. It was the moment when
they had promised to meet the Lady at Cova da Iria.
Francisco was the first to recover. “Perhaps Our Lady is going
to appear to us here!” he said hopefully. Perhaps! They waited
for some sign, a flash of light, a movement, a heavenly voice. But
nothing happened. The noonday hour passed, and there was no
word from her. Jacinta began to cry. Francisco said, almost
tearfully:
“Our Lady must be sad because we didn’t go to Cova da Iria,
and she won’t appear to us any more.” He glanced imploringly at
Lucia. “Will she?”
“I don’t know.” The older girl was stolid and composed again.
“I think she will.”
“Oh, I want so much to see her!”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG4t9VrZ35FXZCqLiSO18MXTWCyRJ03RVNnoBOLFfMkuxDrWMQV4FAmfGNJc5W3yzXbJw6B_ZZ6Dpheu378Ui6Ro0mIuU2Mi_qXhR3rmEwIlve5G37b_ErjNz1s5-zeY1vA2J0a=w491-h810-v0
After that, as Lucia remembers, he was quite animado, quite the
little man taking care of his sister and his cousin. It was Jacinta
who burst into tears when the last hope of a visit from Our Lady
forsook them.
“Our parents will never see us again!” she wailed. “They will
never hear any more about us!”
“Don’t cry, Jacinta,” said her brother. “Let’s offer this to Jesus
for poor sinners, as that Lady told us to do.” And raising his eyes to
heaven, he made his offering: “My Jesus, it is for Your love and
for the conversion of sinners!”
“And for the Holy Father too!” sobbed Jacinta, wiping her
tears. “And in reparation for the sins against the Immaculate
Heart of Mary,” she added almost choking. After that the little
girl kept a brave mien until nightfall, when the darkness made her
think of her mother.
The next morning at ten o’clock the Administrator came to
conduct them to the town hall, where he put them through another
long and tiresome examination. The result was the same as before:
they insisted that they had seen a beautiful Lady, all of white
radiance, and that she had told them a secret. And they refused to
tell this secret even when he threatened them with life imprison¬
ment, torture and death. At noon they were so exhausted that it was
a relief to return to the Administrator’s house, especially when they
discovered that Senhora Santos had prepared a good luncheon for
them; for the Administrator’s wife, like Pilate’s had more
compassion and insight, and seems to have treated the young
prisoners with a great deal of motherly kindness. Her husband, on
the other hand, was resolved not to let them go without obtaining
some sort of confession that would put an end to the unfortunate
epidemic of mysticism they had brought upon the district. He
told them sternly that since good treatment and tolerance had had
no effect, he was going to throw them into jail. And this he
proceeded to do.
The town cadea was not a very fragrant or attractive place. Its
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEqR-re4gXU5Tsobt3N3cR_D9SdsFv4h_6-becH24hdBKR5OMv7eAociO17MRuTatFPjcbvyEBIJMiJAiMKiTA_LmoGa4zk53j_OcNOONRwpNzUVIBNpK1qMow2eGxXXl1aLZ34=w491-h810-v0
cells were dark, acrid with old and disreputable odors, full of harsh
discordant echoes, and shut in by iron bars from the world of free
men. Most of the malefactors, probably pickpockets, cutpurses,
drunkards, brawlers, the riff-raff of the taverns and the marketplace,
were herded together in a common room. Without ceremony the
three children were thrust among them. They shrank away, and
went instinctively toward a barred window at one end of the room.
Jacinta looked out upon the marketplace of Ourem, and burst into
tears.
Lucia put her arms about her. “Why are you crying, Jacinta?”
“Because we are going to die without ever seeing our parents
again. I want to see my mother!”
Francisco said, “If we never see our mother again, patience! Let
us offer it for the conversion of sinners. The worst will be if Our
Lady never comes back any more. That’s what bothers me. But
I am going to offer that, too, for the conversion of sinners.” Yet
even after this brave speech, the boy was tormented from time
to time by the fear that the Lady might never return, and had to
be reassured.
All that Lucia has recorded about the prisoners is that there
were several, and that one of them was a thief, appropriately enough
a sort of good thief in his way. She leaves us to imagine the others:
perhaps one of those mangy beggars, so common in Portugal,
wrapped in layer after layer of filthy rags infested with fleas and
smelling of the red soil on which they had slept so often; perhaps
a drunkard reeking with cheap vinho\ perhaps a pimp, a cutpurse,
even a murderer; lost and forgotten men with bloated unshaven
faces, weak or defiant mouths, heavy sensual or crafty eyes, hopeless
expressions and movements, the rag-tag and bob-tail of the Serra,
the offscounng of Portugal and the world. I wish I had thought to
ask Sister Mary Lucia of the Sorrows to describe these poor fellows.
The contrast they offered to the three innocents with their clean
and spiritual eyes must have been more than accidental. There must
have been something fitting and inevitable about it, like the
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGZnRPtS_epNMhF1in2BfAHOBuc9dYjqf2Caqw40ak4H6FNFutq2AlqSOwFB1zjdXhJaZJcUbRPbaaDWk2uJKgQxEdzCn7SPYZltzAUhzSPQBLmnSDNfe4bDaBjHNCvSwvvrxUmaQ=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima • 113
publicans and wme-bibbers who walked with Christ, the two thieves
with whom He died.
The mere sight of this company was such that whenever the two
girls allowed themselves to think about it they began to weep all
over again. “I want to see my mother! ” moaned Jacinta. “I want my
mother!”
Francisco quieted her, as before, asking, “Then don’t you want to
offer this sacrifice for the conversion of sinners, for the Holy Father,
and in reparation for the sins committed against the Immaculate
Heart of Mary?”
“Yes, I do, I do.”
The boy knelt on the floor, and as the girls followed his example,
he repeated his offering:
“O my Jesus, it is for Your love, for the conversion of sinners,
for the Holy Father, and in reparation for the sins committed
against the Immaculate Heart of Mary!”
Sights and sounds so unfamiliar in that place could hardly fail to
attract attention from the other prisoners, and they began one after
another to gather about the kneeling group. Presently they were
asking questions, good-humored and sympathetic enough; and on
learning who the children were and why they were there, they
offered various bits of consolation and advice.
“The easiest way for you to get out,” said one, “would be to tell
the Administrator the secret, since he wants to know it so much.”
“But the Lady doesn’t want us to tell it!”
“What is it to you whether that Lady likes it or not?”
“I would rather die!” answered Jacinta sharply, and the other two
were of the same mind. 1
“Let us say the Rosary.” The three brought forth their beads.
Jacinta took from around her neck a chain with a medal on which
there was an image of Our Lady. Handing this to a tall prisoner,
she asked him if he would please hang it on a nail high up on the
wall. He did so good-humoredly. All the men watched, with
curiosity and some amusement, as the three knelt on the floor, and
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHrimGYK89ggFWUSaqzXgSP_HIiwYC3aF8IgypArnpbaOdVdVRTW3Ykk4rnbyug8VReK7hFE5SgXoCPmbXZwp9p63cOmpdzlCy74C33PTkcoTDuVLglgea7QYtFET83DRouqlrVCA=w491-h810-v0
114 Our Lady of Fatima
earnestly fixing their dark eyes upon the medal, began to recite
their Tertyo.
“I believe in God . . . Our Father, Who art in heaven . . . Hail,
Mary, full of grace ...”
The sight of the upturned faces and the sound of their high
voices repeating the words so familiar in Portugal was more than
hardened reprobates could resist, and presently some of the men were
on their knees joining in the responses, while even those who
remained standing were mumbling phrases that they had not
spoken in many years. Francisco paused and said, “When people
pray they can’t keep their hats on.” A poor fellow threw his cbapeu
on the floor; the boy picked it up, laid it on a bench, and went on
with the prayer. What memories of childhood, of decent women
half forgotten, of broken hopes and dreams unrealized must have
passed through some of those unkempt bowed heads that August
afternoon! At the end there was a moment of awkward silence as
all shuffled to their feet. Jacinta went to the barred window and
looked out. She was sobbing again.
“Jacinta!” said Lucia, following her. “Don’t you want to offer
this sacrifice to Our Lord?”
“Yes, but when I remember my mother I can’t help crying.”
This made the prisoners uncomfortable. They had all taken a
great fancy to Jacinta. One of them bethought him of a harmonica
he had concealed somewhere about his person. Drawing it out, no
doubt giving it the preliminary caresses with which harmonica
players warm up their instruments, he pursed his bps and blew his
best. Some of the others began to sing. Soon they were all feeling
very jolly, for music can unlock or close the gates of sorrow.
Jacinta’s eyes were dry now, perhaps they even sparkled a little
with interest when one of the prisoners asked if they knew how to
dance.
“We know how to dance the fandango.”
“And the vira, too!”
Lucia records that “Jacinta was thereupon the partner of a poor
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEZFpdbIBYoquEdrmCtBYQ_XfwdQ0_0-GpAMIumhQ0TMYAsIKA6YalAj2bkdI6L0MG39mL620FYu-hbBBJ6ziVn7-8LHyg6HQ0rf1eAvnN3_89_kO9JvYxxScZWyDnFwBf9KGMG=w491-h810-v0
thief who found her so small that he ended by dancing with her
around his neck.” 1 Soon everyone was in hilarious motion. The
room shook with the shuffling and thumping of hob-nailed boots,
the hoarse singing of /oices off-key, the in-and-out wheezing wail
of the harmonica.
This grotesque scene was interrupted by a noise outside, and the
sudden opening of a door. A policeman entered. “Follow me,” he
said to the three children. They did so, and found themselves
presently in the office of the Senhor Administrator.
Santos made a final demand for the secret. When the only
answer was a defiant silence, he assumed the look of man at the
end of his patience, and said coldly:
“Very well. I have tried to save you. But since you will not
obey the government, you shall be boiled alive in a cauldron of
hot oil.”
Fie shouted a command. A door opened to reveal a guard with
an incredibly horrible leering face; he must have been chosen
for the part he was to play. A conversation something like this
followed:
“Is the oil good and hot?”
“Yes, Senhor Administrator.”
“Boiling?”
‘‘Sim, Senhor.”
‘‘Vamosl Take this one and throw her in.”
He pointed to Jacinta. The guard seized her and carried her
away before she could say a word of farewell.
So it had come at last! Lucia began to pray fervently. Francisco
said an Ave Maria that his sister would have the courage to die
rather than betray the secret. Neither doubted that she was already
in her last agony, and that they too had but a few more minutes
to live. They were resolved to die with her. Death was not
as terrible to them as it would have been to other children.
1 She adds that “Our Lady had compassion on his soul and he was converted.”—
Memoir I, 1936, p. 18.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFV-VFOmm0SmkMYjukIPoMtOSnh5YxFnI9iTIkg9ilquDVKlSwsXRuYVFrVwxEpVXfs4BpLtLcBJj1GTkqLJhOfRhbG1Emp7Lnw3FzL5PNOyRtj0ZSXf7JM6y3p43l5o0RnTQMO6w=w491-h810-v0
“What do we care if they kill us?” murmured Francisco. “We’ll
go right to heaven.”
The door opened and the ugly guard returned. “She’s fried,”
he said with ghoulish satisfaction. “Now for the next one!” >
With that he laid hold of Francisco and dragged him off. Lucia
was left alone with the Administrator.
“It will be you next,” he remarked. “You’d better tell me the
secret, Lucia.”
“I would rather die.”
“Very well. You shall.”
The guard returned, and led her away. He took her through
a corridor, and into another room. And there she saw Jacinta
and Francisco, both unharmed, and speechless with joy and sur¬
prise. For they had been told that she was being fried in oil.
The play was over, the tragedy had turned into a farce.
Santos hated to admit, even then, that three children had
defeated his purpose. He kept them at his house that night, in
the same room as before. Next morning he took them to the
town hall for one more inquisition. When that failed, he admitted
that it was no use, and ordered them sent back to Fatima. It was
Wednesday, August 15, 1917, the feast of the Assumption of
Our Lady.
When'Manuel Pedro Marto and his Olimpia went to Fatima
that morning, they were a sad and harassed couple. During two
nightmarish days and nights they had had no idea where their
two youngest children were. Apparently they believed a rumor
to the effect that the Administrator, after taking them to Ourem,
had secretly transferred them to some place of incarceration at
Santarem, a larger and more anti-clerical center of bigotry; and
this may be why the record reveals no effort on the part of the
courageous Ti Marto to obtain their release. It also sheds no
flattering light upon the state of civil liberties under a Republic
which had expended so much oratory upon the alleged tyranny of
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGuDIl0WWxhWjHb923H68rp6xLuF4_4OEcapOOHq5OUx-GxBJG19RmWd-ccKfknkWis0znwzcrswqsWMvxWO6NFWMB-yclQjWHXQ0decZBHkUziNCUzPfgnHMjV_Yq1pmBkhR25=w491-h810-v0
the decayed monarchy, but had done nothing of importance to
improve the status of the proletariat. Ti Marto did not consider
himself a poor man. He owned property worth from $4,000 to
$5,000 in United States money; this with his labor satisfied his
wants, which were few and simple. Yet he was at a loss how
to proceed against an official who had wronged him in the most
criminal way. Lawyers and litigation, to be sure, are luxuries
that peasants can seldom afford, even when they pride them¬
selves, as he does, on not being paupers. Ti Marto turned in his
humble way to God and asked Him to straighten all this out.
Olimpia said her Rosary. On the feast of the Assumption they
went to Mass as usual.
Everyone at Saint Anthony’s church was talking about the kid¬
napping, but none had any suggestion to make as to getting
the children back, or any information about where they were,
until Ti Marto’s stepson Antonio brought word, after Mass, that
they had been seen at Ourem playing on the veranda of the
Administrator’s house. That was news with a vengeance; but
before he could think about going there, he heard someone else
say they were in Fatima, on the porch of the rectory. And there,
sure enough, they were, with one of the underlings of the Adminis¬
trator. Presently Ti Marto had Jacinta in his arms, his tears falling
on her face. Francisco and Lucia clung to him, asking for his
blessing.
“Well, here are your children,” said the official from Ourem,
as if announcing a great favor.
It was well for him that before Ti Marto could reply, a hulla¬
balloo arose from the churchyard near by, where the people had
lingered to gossip after Mass. The air was full of clenched fists,
clubs, and angry words. Father Ferreira appeared in the side door
of the chuch, very indignant. He had been making his thanks¬
giving after Mass at a prie-dieu before the altar, when the noise
had startled him, and seeing Ti Marto on the rectory porch, he
suspected him of being responsible.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFNaZT2no3D07Z2ZdmNIUAQXsRkNwl5sb6hJPg9dQ4RksxYiq24fQGX7bC2GBlAbj8iJzwok3bcWJ1cW5GmnbbbcwbbXZOkHq7HASkGAQ8C0N9s_LAXQfvioRMmIU8woHA5Ar2JqQ=w491-h810-v0
“Senhor Marto, you are doing me a great injustice here!” he
exclaimed.
The father of Jacinta and Francisco did not know what to reply.
But after the priest had gone back into the church, he addressed
the mob:
“Boys, behave yourselves! Some of you are shouting against
the Prior, some against the Administrator, some against the
Regidor. Nobody is to blame here. The fault is one of unbelief,
and all has been permitted by the power of the One above!”
The Prior, who was listening at the church window, thrust his
head out and cried:
“He speaks very well! Senhor Manuel speaks-very well!”
Just then the Administrator appeared in his wagon, on his way
home (not from Mass, but from the market), and concluding,
as the Prior had, that Ti Marto was inciting the mob to vengeance,
he shouted, “Stop that, Senhor Marto!”
“All1 right, all right! There’s nothing new about it.” Ti Marto
steadily watched his enemy approach. He saw something else
that the Blacksmith had not noticed. Some of the young men
in the crowd had caught sight of him, and armed with clubs and
staves, they were advancing upon him from the rear. Santos
addressed the father -of Jacinta and Francisco almost jovially:
“Senhor Marto, come and have a glass of wine with me!”
“No thank you, much obliged.”
Then, according to Marto’s account, he saw the young fellows
with bludgeons closing in about the Administrator. Something
had to be done at once if bloodshed was to be prevented. Ti Marto
quickly stepped up to the side of Santos and said:
“With regard to your invitation, perhaps I will accept it.”
Agreeably surprised, and wholly unaware of the danger he was
in, the Administrator took his arm, and they crossed the church¬
yard and the highway toward a little wine shop near the gate
of the cemetery.
“You can ask the children if I treated them badly,” began the
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFxVBpOrQr6q86b433E2Pt0MxDoB8ZDpQIWt_F40LR_nOscpoycTGiHGkJfxaVe7N_ldNX4P9r5p2FX77oxFHbx3segJDq2pe3v3gTZFVskSB6oupUqgyoyMYcliGg8f-a3xQak-A=w491-h810-v0
Blacksmith, a little uncomfortable perhaps under the searching
brown eyes of his companion.
“Yes, yes, Senhor Administrator! No doubt about it. The
crowd has more questions to ask about that than I have.”
Santos looked back and saw the young men with their bludgeons,
glaring at him and still undecided whether to attack him or no.
But the intervention of Ti Marto had been effective, and the
Administrator, at the door of the little shop, was already calling
for bread, cheese and wine. He began talking volubly as they
seated themselves at a table. Among other things he tried to
convince his guest that the children had told him the secret.
“Yes, yes!” said the farmer with his slow canny grin. “They
don’t tell their father or their mother, but they tell the Senhor
Administrator! I can well believe it.”
He drank a glass of wine and excused himself. As they left
the shop the Administrator offered him a lift as far as the Post
Office. The people along the roadside were saying, “Ti Marto
said too much and the Blacksmith has arrested him.” 2
Meanwhile Lucia and her cousins, followed by a few curious
stragglers, had gone to the scene of the apparitions, two miles
away (and they did this, as Ti Marto remembers, before they
went home) to say the Rosary before the tree. Poor azinheira! It
had only a few leaves left, for people had been carrying away the
upper foliage and even some of the branches as relics and souvenirs.
Near it stood the table, with two candlesticks and some flowers,
that Maria Carreira had placed there on the thirteenth of August.
The good woman from Moita had little realized what a responsi¬
bility she was taking upon herself. Many small coins had been
cast upon the table; but when it was knocked over during the
confusion over the discovery of the kidnapping, they were scattered
on the ground. Loud voices appraised her of the fact. “Woman,
pick up that money! Keep track of it! See you don’t lose any of
2 So ends another of Marto’s recollections in De Marchi, op. cit., pp. 127-129.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF3oFLfNCLsxsf78uxF2e4SQlH3SkOOX6B_DaXFJXMOMOi8hzk6ZVgO5tZqL911P8dt_0TUlH8aYQDQSGZLc9efhW09hHk3BbTzJD7dyR1obwEvHAaFxthFWJpIcKUgMJvjlXhQMQ=w491-h810-v0
120 / Our Lady of Fatima
it!” Everyone took it for granted that she was the official custodian
of the shrine. So on hands and knees she crawled this way and
that, picking up all she could find; and when she had them all
gathered on the table, the total came to 1340 reis.3
On Tuesday, the fourteenth, Maria Carreira took this treasure
in a bag to the home of Ti Marto. He refused to accept it, saying
sarcastically, “Don’t tempt me, woman, for I am already tempted.”
Next she offered it to Lucia. And she remembers that the child
said:
“God defend me! I don’t want it either!”
The good soul then took it to the Prior of Fatima. Father
Ferreira by this time was heartily sick of the whole affair of Cova
da Ina, which had so disturbed his tranquility and that of his
parish, and he shrank away as if the money were accurst.
“And then the mustard stuck in my nose too,” Maria recalls,
with great dignity, “and I said, ‘Well! / don’t want it either,
and I’m going to put it right back where I got it.’ ”
The Prior raised his hand in protest, “Don’t do that, woman!
Keep it, or deliver it to someone who will keep it until we see
what is to be done about all this!”
Maria Carreira took the money home and hid it. Yet there
was no peace in its possession. Everyone wanted to know what
she intended to do with it. If one of her daughters had a new
pair of shoes, eyebrows were raised significantly. One day a self-
appointed committee of four men called upon her to demand
the hoard, saying they were going to build a chapel on the site
of the apparitions. “Not a reis shall you have,” exclaimed Maria.
Afterwards she was afraid she had been wrong. Perhaps Our
Lady wanted these men to make a shrine. She hurried to Fatima
to offer the money once more to the Prior. No, he would have
none of it.
Finally, she remembered that the owner of the land on which
3 Less than two dollars.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGPQ6caOJ9ae2qE3X3k9h9nxQHLsckKMjQIyxHLWHdMdOWTvU0Mg2mSxRmOBGS-Nl5gAfcNbejGHrtdHuz074oXwHI-M7iK6U5ia8nT8xK64Lpv8a1mEruc-b8zNPqh016rPnbFnA=w491-h810-v0
the money had been cast was Lucia’s father. If anyone ought to
have something to say about the disposal of it, it was he; and
his consent would certainly be necessary if a chapel was ever
to be built. She was afraid of Antonio Abcbora. People had told
her what he had said about her: “If I meet that woman from
Moita in the Cova, the thing won’t stop there!” and some had
warned her to avoid him, especially in his cups. Perhaps the best
time to talk with him would be just after Mass. On August 15,
the Sunday after the arrest of the children, she got up her courage
and went, not without some qualms, to his house in Aljustrel.
And sure enough, she found him “without a drop on him.”,
“I am told that Senhor Antonio is much offended,” she began,
“because I go to his land in Cova da Ilia for flowers, and so on.
And I would like to ask his permission to continue to go there.” *
“Take as many flowers as you want,” he replied, unexpectedly
genial. “What I won’t stand for is building a tabernacle on my
property. Some people have already asked me, but I won’t have it.”
Maria thanked him and took her leave. She thought it better
not to mention the money. But she had another idea. She sought
out Lucia again and begged her to ask Our Lady, the next time
she saw her, what to do with the treasure. The child said she
would, on the thirteenth of September.
That same Sunday morning (August 19) Lucia and Francisco
and his brother John took their sheep out to graze on the Serra.
She was in a happy mood. It was good to be free on a warm clear
day, like those birds that darted by in flashes of brilliant blue,
or the white butterflies that flitted more drowsily now, or even
the cicadas that sang a little wearily in the trees. So the three
strolled, played, talked, and said their prayers, until, about four
o’clock in the afternoon, they found themselves in a hollow called
Vahnhos, on the northern slope of Cabc^o and about halfway
between the cave and Aljustrel. The narrow wagon road bent
sharply there, under some large olive trees, and the ancient stone
wall on one side had fallen down, leaving an opening into a barren
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFQOfIZiGoxS8Yo57JXeaRmp3TYPNcfU_Nc2c-dNAyr7E6HOSMmujGLf2KsTPcwlwzD_3YnZICfHcLQvdg2hV9WgkYOPnjsvKyXAhDmzDXD7g1pJcIImny_BK3D_riMRleKzfxRfw=w491-h810-v0
122 Our Lady of Fatima
and rocky pasture. Beyond this were several other olive trees, and
a few dark scrubby pines and azinheiras.
Suddenly Lucia became aware of some subtle change in the
atmosphere. It was not a gathering storm, it was more like the
mysterious intensity she had always felt before any supernatural
visitation. She looked at Francisco and knew that she was right.
Yes, the Lady was coming. And Jacinta was not there.
They begged John to run and fetch her while they watched the
sheep. When they offered him two vintens or pennies he finally
consented, and lumbered off toward Aljustrel. Their eyes followed
him anxiously.
A few minutes later there was a flash of light, exactly like those
that had always heralded the approach of the Lady. They saw
Jacinta running toward them, frantically. Now she was with
them, panting, questioning.
The olive trees were a shimmer of pale silver in the slanting light
of afternoon. This might have been a corner of that hill country
of Judea where Mary went in haste to meet her cousin. But far
more brilliant than the sheen on the olives was the radiance that
now assembled at the breach in the wall just over a small azinheira,
very much like the one at Cova da Ina. And there in the midst
of the unearthly glow was the lovely familiar figure, looking
tenderly down at the young apostles who had suffered so much
for love of her.
“Que e que Vocemece me quere?” asked Lucia almost mechan¬
ically. “What is it that you want of me?”
“I want you to continue to go to Cova da Ina on the thirteenth
day and to continue to recite the Rosary every day. In the last
month I will perform the miracle so that all shall believe.”
Lucia remembered the promise she had made to Maria Carreira.
“What do you want me to do with the money that the crowd
left in the Cova da Ina?”
“Make two pedestals; one, carry it, you with Jacinta and two
other girls dressed in white, and the other let Francisco carry with
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHNHdzSCeeZYoP02HcB8xJTNtU-Jp47y8BsKL0n0fbunfpgleDEgxtDEWnpnnN5jrcM8Xn4y66nIauyHsFkrNAtg3LoTujLth40AuobJu0t78KY9AiA7D1SjpxhV7X-u3VUsMQkvQ=w491-h810-v0
I23 Our Lady of Fatima
three other boys. The money on th6 pedestals is for the feast of
the Lady of the Rosary, and that which is left over is for the sup¬
port of the chapel which they are going to have built.”
“I want to ask you to cure some sick people.”
“Yes, some I will cure during the year.”
The Lady paused, and then continued, very earnestly:
“Pray, pray a great deal, and make sacrifices for sinners, for
many souls go to hell because they have no one to sacrifice and
pray for them.”
With that she receded toward the east and vanished.4
The children remained for a long while in a state of exalted joy,
joy twice as sweet after so many troubles and disappointments. It
was the ninth day since Lucia had been taken to Ourem by her
father for the first talk with the Administrator. What a novena!
It had gone on from trial to trial, until the issue seemed almost
hopeless, only to end in glory and thanksgiving.
When they finally became capable of motion, they cut off the
branches of the shrub on which the Lady had stood, and took
them home. Ti Marto still remembers a fragrance that he can only
call magnifico. Even Maria Rosa had to admit that there was a
singularly sweet something that she had never before noticed.
Clearly she was weakening a bit. But she still maintained that
it was all nonsense about the Mother of God appearing to the
likes of her Lucia.
4 This is Lucia’s recollection of the conversation, Memoir IV, p. 40.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHhnYBGV8ARyYYYj-TDqfZXCFblrWr4T0qHTUy6kFa5OtzflofHrqubxbBep4KbzcUVkWw7V5PMExEY-ocQeD4KLrIPFrRYe8i-Qx0FR5MjwYIaQMmAAFij-QFXyYNO0lUGsNrl2Q=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER XII
The three children were standing on the narrow street of Aljustrel
discussing their adventures, when Lucia noticed, almost under
her bare brown feet, a heavy piece of rope. She picked it up idly.
“Ouch!” The shaggy coil had scratched her arm. This gave her
an idea. “Look! This hurts! We can make a girdle of it and
offer this sacrifice to God.” Dividing it forthwith, each one wore
a piece of it wrapped around the body, next to the skin. Day and
night they hugged this improvised hair shirt, even though it
pricked, chafed and itched until they could hardly tolerate it
another moment; even though it troubled their rest at night, and
sometimes would not allow them to sleep at all. What was health
compared to saving souls from hell? And what was comfort to
the joys of an eternal heaven? (f)
It hurt Jacinta more than a hair shirt to hear people cursing or
using foul language. On one such occasion she covered her face
with her hands and said, “O my God, these people don’t know
that for saying such things they can go to hell. Pardon them, my
Jesus, and convert them.” Then she would say the prayer the
Lady had told them to add to the Rosary.
There were many objective signs that these penances were
pleasing to God, and that Jacinta in particular was advancing on
the road to sainthood. She had become more patient, more long-
suffering, more affectionate; she had many visions of things that
later came to pass; and in Lucia’s opinion she must have received,
by this time, the gift of infused wisdom. One day she said three
Aves for a wretched woman with a terrible disease, and all the
symptoms vanished.
There was another woman in Aljustrel who never lost an oppor¬
tunity to revile the three children as liars and impostors. Instead
124
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHSKC-AadqtFMJEG-CTP92LB5FWZH0QW614xrs4x_HJLhh0g34bAuppx0CN6eG-tRlx-eWAjfXrRwvZS6GTVwcuyyJSWCU520lC2CyrDkY6GPlRZ5W4JvlRvWevGtwZn8KSU8XD=w491-h810-v0
of getting angry, Jacinta said, “We must ask Our Lady to convert
this woman. She has so many sins which she does not confess that
she will go to hell!” They offered some penances for her. And
never again did she give them an unkind word.
It would have been hard for the children to say which caused
them more annoyance, the hordes of the devout, or professedly
devout, who darkened their doors daily and made the lives of
their families miserable, or the opposition, which incongruously
included most of the clergy and many sincere Catholics along
with Carbonari, Radicals and Liberals of all shades of unbelief.
There was this at least to be said for the scoffers: they did not
come knocking at Lucia’s door at all hours, asking for a piece of
her kerchief as a relic, or wanting to touch her hair, or insisting
that when she saw Our Lady she remember all the symptoms of
Cousin Quiteria’s kidney trouble, or the numerous qualifications
of Brother Antonio for a better position than the one he held.
And the diatribes of the anti-clerical press gave no annoyance in
Aljustrel, because no one read them.
Yet now and then the opposition made some special effort to be
troublesome. There was a certain journalist named Jose do Vale,
who edited an anarchist paper called O Mundo (The World).
He was also a tireless pamphleteer with a distinguished gift for
excoriation and invective which his enemies attributed to a habit
of getting drunk before sitting down to write. His indignation
over the scandal at Cova da Iria was already boiling over into
pamphlets that were peddled in Torres Novas, Ourem and other
towns of the Serra.
Had this been all, the humble Christians of the Serra might
have been content to console themselves with the words, “If the
world hates you, know that it has hated Me before it hated you.
If you were of the world, the world would love its own; but
because you are not of the world, but I chose you out of the
world, therefore the world hates you.” But the editor of The
World did not stop with denunciations of priests, Jesuits, tricksters
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEpY7xcZJHKxJAUUTaAf0N9TbkTz6dib98bXpGAfuTocq4iqb3xYWK56wECrzI_6hdoHfrhwT1el75LVDeXK-L5ISeCbVmd3Jj5jewWk8Jtq5kgLuCJJoRLoU5iUJ9yPBWoIYPQ_w=w491-h810-v0
and superstitious ignoramuses. He summoned all liberals, all friends
of progress and enlightenment to hold a meeting on the following
Sunday at Fatima just after the parish Mass, to consider what
measures should be taken to unmask and punish the authors and
comedians of the farce at Cova da Iria.
On learning this, the Prior of Fatima quietly had the word
passed among his parishioners that Mass that Sunday would be at
the Chapel of Our Lady of Ortiga, two miles away. When a con¬
siderable number of fervent unbelievers assembled at Saint
Anthony’s, they found almost no one on hand except a few of
their own, including the Administrator of Ourem, the Regidor
Francisco da Silva, and Jose do Vale himself. Disappointed but
undaunted, they decided to proceed to Cova da Iria.
The Catholics of Lomba d’Egua and Moita had expected this,
and a certain peasant who had a whole herd of burros had tied
them to azinheira trees near the scene of the apparitions. As the
liberals approached, he rubbed on the nose of each “a certain
liquid” guaranteed to make any burro bray his loudest. Now,
the bray of that dwarfed animal even under the most favorable
circumstances is one of the most disturbing, not to say excruciating,
sounds in all the range of audible creation. On a dark night in a
lonely place it acquires a power to evoke blood-curdling suggestions,
such as groans of dying men on a rainy battlefield, the yowling
of gigantic alley cats, the curses and reproaches of lost souls in
pain. It was no conciliatory or complimentary sort of music, then,
that greeted the forces of enlightenment as they struggled up the
hill from the highway. And as a final insult to climax this injury,
they found waiting for them, near the azinheira where Our Lady
had appeared, a pile of straw and feed. The farmers of Moita had
spread it about as if to welcome a delegation of asses.
To make sure that the subtle point would not be missed, a group
of people from Moita, including the indomitable Maria Carreira,
were waiting on the next rise to explain it with loud and lusty
scorn. This enraged some of the newcomers so much that they
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHvq2arNY3Ha8aIJv1AGZGxzwD5n6DtxdiO6o4jyYuyBAyTvkB1hv-iVTSfCyPJfdQumpBIgvLg6L-K2WFsXSPtAxqeej8JcjS8FM6G95Y5444T1ZYiKbWAiGhukNN5G0vY30PpMw=w491-h810-v0
began to shout back some highly uncomplimentary things about
Catholics and the Church. The faithful countered this with:
“Viva Jesus e Maria! Viva Jesus e Maria!”
This drew another taunt from the invaders. The shouts echoed
back and forth through the clear air of Cova da Ina. The Catholics
would cry:
“O burros, o burros, o bestas!” “Burros! Beasts!”
And the Freethinkers would retort:
“Botas da serra! Botas da serra!” “Clodhoppers! Mountain
clodhoppers!”
The appearance of some policemen put an end to this in good
time. But the incident had revealed how tensely the inhabitants
of the highlands, both believers and non-believers, were waiting
for the thirteenth day when, according to the three children, the
Lady had promised to return to Cova da Ina. On the twelfth of
September the roads were full of pilgrims, and by evening the
houses of the Martos and Aboboras were surrounded by them,
as on the previous occasion. Most of these people slept in the
fields. At sunrise on the thirteenth there were thousands of them
at Aljustrel and Cova da Iria, reciting the Rosary or the Litany of
Our Lady.
By the time the three children were ready to start for the place
of the apparitions, the main highway was so jammed that it was
impossible to move. “All wanted to see and talk with us,” wrote
Lucia. “There was no human respect in that crowd! Many of
them, and even gentlemen and noblemen, broke through the
press and knelt before us, asking us to present their necessities
to Our Lady. Others, unable to get near, would shout:
“ ‘For the love of God, ask Our Lady to cure my son, who is
lame!’
“ ‘Ask her to cure mine, who is blind!’
“ ‘And mine who is deaf!’
“ ‘And to bring my sons home from the war!’
“ ‘And my husband!’ \
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFu4z7M1ewFoKDJkrORvy1l_C57_2juL5iU3tPx-mvJWuxCPk4qp9W1X20v-EMe5bY5oMPuZ3qL845AtGAJG8hS5sYwdr0mTh0vkbMClCz13wCMmzdo3BOFdop_7T9vzt-Cf-3F6A=w491-h810-v0
^128 Our Lady of Fatima
“ ‘And to convert a sinner for me!’
‘To give me health, for I have tuberculosis!’
“And so on. In that place appeared all the miseries of poor
humanity,” continued Lucia, “and some shouted even from the
tops of trees and walls where they had climbed to see us pass.
Saying ‘Yes’ to some, giving a hand to others to help them get
up out of the dust of the earth, we managed to move along, thanks
to some gentlemen who went ahead opening a passage for us
through the multitudes.
“When now I read in the New Testament such enchanting
scenes of the passage of Our Lord through Palestine, I remember
these that Our Lady made me a witness of when I was so young,
on those poor roads and streets from Aljustrel to Fatima and to
Cova da Iria, and I give thanks to God, offering Fhm the faith
of our good Portuguese multitude; and I think, ‘If these people
so humbled themselves before three poor children only because
they had been granted mercifully the grace to speak with the
Mother of God, what would they not do if they saw before them
Jesus Christ Himself? . . . Finally we arrived at Cova da Iria,
near the canasqueira, and I began to say the Rosary with the
crowd.”
Ay, what a crowd! It was larger than ever, and composed of
pilgrims from all parts of Portugal. And besides the usual barefoot
peasants, the rich and the poor, the workers, the ladies and gentle¬
men from many villages and towns, there were some thirty young
seminarians and five or six priests. One of the latter was the Rever¬
end Monsignor Joao Quaresma. Another was the Reverend Father
Manuel Pereira da Silva, then a curate at Leina, who went to the
scene (so he told me) chiefly out of curiosity, with no preconcep¬
tions either way. These priests, with the Prior of Santa Catalina
and Monsignor Manuel do Carmo Gois, had left Leina early
that fine September morning in a squeaky carriage drawn by a
decrepit old horse. When they finally arrived after a rough journey,
they secured a place of vantage on a piece of high ground over-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE3YiVL4S9torcMXiqXNTCYVMn61sWOJfoiHnAzXbYwdyTagQKTgiYOwCbJTrDbhrggt4w6dc37Y5cn6GSRhPAf7jKswtrF3Mj9KZ-vt6wLKYoveSiOnR9jzTLyxqu6EVzDpDD0=w491-h810-v0
looking the vast natural amphitheatre, already dark and seething
with human forms.
“At midday a complete silence, save for the whisper of prayers,
fell over the crowd,” wrote Monsignor Joao Quaresma fifteen
years later. “Suddenly there were shouts of rejoicing . . . voices
praising Our Lady. Arms went up to point at something above.
‘Look, don’t you see?’ . . . ‘Yes, now I see!’ . . . There was
not a cloud in the azure sky. I too raised my eyes and tried to
scrutinize the amplitude of the sky, to see what more fortunate
eyes had first looked upon. ... To my great astonishment I
saw clearly and distinctly a luminous globe that moved from
the east toward the west, slowly and majestically gliding down
across the distance. My friend also looked and had the good
fortune to enjoy the same unexpected and enchanting apparition.
. . . Suddenly the globe with its extraordinary light vanished
before our eyes. . . .
‘What do you think of that globe?’ I asked of my friend,
who seemed to be enthusiastic over what we had seen.
“ ‘That it was Our Lady,’ he replied w'lthout hesitation. It was
my conviction also. The little shepherds looked on the Mother
of God herself; to us was granted the grace to see the carriage
which had transported her from heaven to the barren inhospitable
heath of the Serra da Aire.
“We must say that all those who were near us observed what
we did. For on all sides were heard manifestations of joy and
greetings to Our Lady. Many, however, saw nothing.
“We felt that we were very fortunate. How enthusiastically my
colleague went about from group to group in the Cova da Iria
and afterwards on the highway outside, finding out what they had
seen. The persons interrogated were of various social classes; all
unanimously affirmed the reality of the phenomena which we.
ourselves had witnessed.” 1
1 Letter of October 13, 1932, in De Marchi, pp. 147-148.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFYhDz-kecI538c-7bbS2HG11pNdQ9_n0sJ7z9ts-1545D8bPscT2mvoOLyima-ZbNubhKrmATC5x16sqg0YwxoUI8aPi6jIgFtlcac9tvJT2YmM1RXHKYXNA4lI27eNRVyE495lA=w491-h810-v0
Meanwhile the Lady had revealed herself to the three children,
and Lucia and Jacinta had heard her lovely voice in the briefest
of all their conversations.
“Continue to say the Rosary,” she said, “to bring about the
end of the war. In October Our Lord will come also, and Our
Lady of the Sorrov/s of Carmel, and Saint Joseph with the Child
Jesus, to bless the world. God is content with your sacrifices, but
does not wish you to sleep with the rope—wear it only during
the day.”
Lucia said, “They have begged me to ask you many things:
the cure of some sick persons ... of a deaf mute.”
“Yes,” answered the Lady, “some I will cure, others not. In
October I will perform the miracle so that all will believe.”
And she disappeared in the same manner as before.
So ended the fifth apparition, as Lucia records it.2 Short though
it was, it left the children confirmed in their faith and greatly
consoled. How relieved they were to give up wearing the rough
rope next to their tender bodies at night! What pleased Francisco
more than this, though, was her promise that in the following
month he would see Our Lord.
“Ai que bom!” he cried. “Only one more month, and I love
Him so!”
One of the priests at Cova da Iria on September 13 was the
Reverend Doctor Manuel Nunes Formigao, canon of the cathedral
at Lisboa and professor at the Seminary of Santarem. Noted
throughout Portugal for his integrity and learning, he had been
asked by the Administrator of the Patriarchate in Lisboa to investi¬
gate the strange occurrences, of which conflicting reports had
traveled as far as the capital. Standing in the road about two
hundred meters from the azinheira, he had noticed the peculiar
dimming of the sun’s light in a cloudless sky, but had discounted
this as a possible natural phenomenon due to the altitude of the
2 Memoir IV, p. 41.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEFjgTeN3LYW3bfyl1LzFTgraGBiyRbw6pUgPE9aOboDQtooz0k4ULVDnQW7lgRYmeATmoyKg_F_fgK1AmDyoIZMAuahmHyWMlcpMrn7p47Lw9Yt83aQVXVdW8qo1wAFju6r2FIEg=w491-h810-v0
Serra, almost half a mile above sea level. He had not noticed the
luminous globe reported by Monsignor Quaresma and others, but
the fact that they were so positive about it convinced him that
they must have seen something extraordinary, and stimulated his
curiosity to get at the bottom of the whole affair. For this purpose
he returned to Fatima on Thursday, September 29, and went to
Aljustrel to ask questions. Both Maria Rosa and Olimpia received
him with all respect, and sent out messengers to find the children.
Lucia was at Cova da Ina, the others playing about the village.
Jacinta was the first to arrive.
1 he little girl seemed frightened and embarrassed, in the opinion
of Dr. Formigao, but answered readily, and seemed no longer ill
at ease after her brother made his appearance. Francisco came in
carelessly with his hat on. When jacinta motioned him to take it
off, he paid no attention to her, but sat down on a stool and
looked attentively at the inquisitor. When questioned he answered
calmly and with no sign of embarrassment. The visitor decided
to interrogate him first, and sent Jacinta out to play on the street
with some other girls until he had finished. Then he recalled
Jacinta and questioned her separately.
By that time Lucia had come in from Cova da Iria. She was the
most natural and composed of the three, as Dr. Formigao reported
when he published his first account of the conversations in 1921.
He remarked too that she was a robust, healthy, normal-looking
girl, with no indications of vanity, and no pathological traits
whatever. Poor Maria Rosa hovered about like an anxious mother
bird, worried and lamenting as usual. The sharp eye of Dr.
Formigao noticed a leak in the roof.
All three of the examinations (which have been printed verbatim
in the books of Dr. Formigao, Father De Marchi and Father
Fonseca) give the impression, to this reader at least, that the
children were truthfully reporting what they had actually seen
and heard. The few slight discrepancies offer no real difficulties.
Jacinta, for example, said without hesitation, as the others did.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGX0CRLG9vBkoM5hMYlxWIBAkHZQW3GM_YRMQiEIYHHjEww5ZQxbZEmeHydHSQNBkfrcre7ATvmRZGI3gseIkWuNJ2D8PiXDz87f3Cst1h0H38LZttPwnwzzyopyHXKJYbOinW7ZA=w491-h810-v0
[132 Our Lady of Fatima
that the Lady held her rosaiy in her right hand. When the ques¬
tion was repeated with some insistence, she became confused,
trying to imagine which of her own hands corresponded to the
one in which the Lady had held the beads. Again, Francisco said
he could not see her ears because they were covered with her
mantle; Jacinta agreed. But Lucia was under the impression that
she had seen small dazzling earrings. At first, too, she said that
she had seen a bright gold border on the Lady’s gown; later she
was of the opinion that this was simply a more intense edging
of the light of which all the vision, including the garments, seemed
to be made. This sort of divergence is to be expected in all
human testimony.
Lucia’s examination is the longest and most detailed of the three.
Possibly the priest had heard one of the vague rumors about the
Angel in 1915 or 1916, for almost at the outset he remarked:
“They say that the Lady appeared to you last year also? What
is true about this?”
“She never appeared to me last year,” replied Lucia quietly, “or
before May of this year, nor have I said so to anyone, for it
was not true.”
“Did she show herself desirous that many persons should be
present on the thirteenth day of each month during the appari¬
tions at Cova da Iria? ”
“She said nothing about that.”
“Is it certain that she revealed a secret to you, forbidding you
to tell anyone what it was?” <<t • , • »
It is certain.
“Did she say this only to you or to your companions?”
“To all three.”
“Can you not reveal it at least to your confessor?”
Lucia was silent. She seemed somewhat perplexed.
“They say,” continued the investigator, “that to free yourself
from the importunities of the Senhor Administrator the day when
you were arrested, you told him, as if it were the secret, a thing
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHpQwBlDrlTVeo6aNQDRVWCqN4z7e4wyys1HOROlK00THvG5J48x7Oe38m8ozPq5gnSvyyz3tloFOi89OKE5tE2CqNqKoaFezxHZGWv8IL-WGdRKlCWKUlAUo9oYWmBTx_IbvYLtw=w491-h810-v0
that was not, thus deceiving him, and boasting afterwards of
having beaten him at this game. Is it true?”
“It is not. The Senhor Administrator really wanted me to reveal
the secret, but as I could not tell it to anyone, I kept silent,
in spite of his insisting much that I comply with his wishes. What
I did was to tell all that the Lady had told me, short of the
secret. And perhaps on this account the Senhor Administrator
thought that I had also revealed the secret. I did not try to
deceive.”
“The Lady commanded you to learn to read?”
“Yes, the second time she appeared.”
“But if she said that she would take you to heaven in the
month of the coming October, what good would it be for you
to learn to read?”
“That-is not true. The Lady never said that she would take me
to heaven in October, and I never said that she had told me such
a thing.”
Later in the questioning he asked:
“Why did you lower your eyes sometimes and stop looking at
the Lady?”
“It was because at times she blinded me.”
“Did she teach you some prayer?”
“Yes, and she wanted us to recite it after each mystery of the
Rosary.”
“Do you know this prayer by heart?”
“I do.”
bay it.
“O my Jesus, pardon us, save us from the fire of hell, draw all
souls to heaven, especially those in most need.” 3
3 This is only a partial abstract of the testimony first published in 1921 in
Os episodios maravilhosos de Fatima, by the Visconde de Montelo (the pen name
of Dr. Formigao). Later works of his on the same subject appeared in 1923, 1927,
1929, 1930 and 1936.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEUBwCYngjHAjxkxfFbagfVYvAXcJv1-86GUBbzYOcvnRz9KWMa-2zttICXDxIF_ZS1_0VrHIHHlH0QcU5wL0-wHfVIXXZixsJE7yAkglJyYusGZPf_2kgM1kh0tqDtd3DuCK7-zA=w491-h810-v0
Thus ended the first interrogation o£ which a record was made.
Dr. Formigao admitted that the children had made a favorable
impression upon him. Yet, after thinking the whole matter over
at the Seminary of Santarem, he prepared another series of ques¬
tions of a more searching and fundamental sort, framed to expose
the subtle deceits, if any, of subconscious or satanic agencies. On
October io he boarded a train for Chao da Magas, and there
engaged a horse and two-wheeled buggy in which he was driven
to Vila Nova de Ourem. It was eleven o’clock at night when he
reached a tiny hamlet called Montelo, about two miles from
Fatima. There he found a pen name, “the Visconde de Montelo,”
and a lodging for the night with a family named Gongalves, who
were able to give him full dossiers on the Marto and Abobora
families. (T)
Everyone agreed that Ti Marto was the most solid and trust¬
worthy citizen of the mountains—indeed, he was incapable of
deceiving anyone; and he and his wife Olimpia were universally
respected as good Catholics who practiced what they professed.
Maria Rosa was devout, honest and hard-working. Tier husband
Antonio was indifferent to religion and liked wine too well, but
there was no malice in him. Neither family was poor according
to the standards of the Serra. Neither had done anything to capi¬
talize on the apparitions—quite the contrary; they had discouraged
the cult which had put them to so much annoyance, and this
was especially true of the Aboboras. The children, too, were all
well liked. Most people had disbelieved them in May and June,
but were now inclined to accept their story, since so many had
seen the cloud over the tree on August 13, and had noted the
other strange phenomena in August and September. With all
this background now established in his mind, Dr. Formigao
proceeded on October 11 to Aljustrel, and again visited the home
of Antonio Abobora.
While Lucia was being sought, the investigator noticed that
the leak in the roof was still unrepaired, and asked some questions
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEb6FVc1uxnZQlhGvmVyP4HLtceHzu5VYvYjuSHQc5-6nR3DCfv6oiEnO4hBiykWipFh1ntLFIDu97hV8JzE0TUn0g2c5LiYL2Rr9yLoaVBZHCLIv0QIC1pZrS17XzRkW191qN2ig=w491-h810-v0
of Maria Rosa. He was especially curious to know whether she
had eVer read to Lucia the fairly well-known story of the apparition
of Our Lady to two shepherd children, Maximin and Melanie,
at La Salette in southern France on September .19, 1846. There
were certain resemblances between that episode and the ones at
Fatima. At La Salette Our Lady had told the children a secret,
which they revealed to no one but Pope Pius IX; and she had given
them a warning of great calamities if the people of France did
not stop offending God. The similarity was not necessarily con¬
clusive, yet it might be significant. Father Formigao was curious
to know whether Lucia had been much impressed by the French
account. Maria Rosa thought not; the child had never mentioned
it again, so far as she could recollect.
When the girl appeared, she was questioned at some length in
the presence of four witnesses.
“What did the Lady say she would do to make the crowd
believe she had appeared?” asked Dr. Formigao.
“She said she was going to perform a miracle.”
“When did she say that?”
“She said it a few times—once on the occasion of the first
apparition, and when I asked her the question.”
“Aren’t you afraid that the crowd will do you some harm if
nothing extraordinary is seen on that day?”
“I haven’t any fear,” replied Lucia.
“Did you ever see the Lady bless herself, pray, or finger the
beads?”
“No. . . .”
“Did she tell you to pray for the conversion of sinners?”
“No. She told me to pray to the Lady of the Rosary so that
the war would end.” Lucia explained later that the Lady had asked
for sacrifices rather than prayers for the conversion of sinners.
“Did you see the signs other persons say were seen, such as a
star and roses displayed on the garment of the Lady, and so on?”
“I saw no star or other signs.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGvgIpJ-Sef6Ez3PvW6T65BIC2EAhRdTQcRX9_th2WAhSAYJejUt6XKfvLl3eKCacJapzjwAIQr1FMbD4vllm9Xhn0ZHouUV7T6c8lXXmbfJLpvV0tXcDtm_IaNF-5JshhQazUKIw=w491-h810-v0
“Can you read?”
“No, I can’t.”
“Are you going to learn to read?”
“No, I’m not.”
“How then will you obey the order the Lady has given you
in this regard?”
Lucia was silent. As she later explained, she did not wish to
accuse or embarrass Maria Rosa.
Finally the priest said?
“You have heard your mother read the book called Short Mission
where the story is told of the apparition of Our Lady to a boy and
a girl?”
“Yes, I have.”
“Did you often think of that story and speak of it to other girls?”
“I didn’t think of that story, nor did I tell it to anyone.”
Dr. Formigao then reexamined Jacinta.
“Did you also hear the secret, or was it told only to Lucia?”
“I heard it too.”
“When did you hear it?”
“The second time, on the day of Saint Anthony.”
“Is this secret so that you will be rich?”
“No!”
“Is it so that you will be good and happy?”
“Yes, it is for the good of all three.”
“Is it that you will go to heaven?”
“No.”
“Can’t you reveal the secret?”
“No.”
“Why?”
“Because the Lady said we were not to tell the secret to anyone.”
“If the crowd knew the secret, would they be sad?”
“Yes, they would.”
Now it was Francisco’s turn.
“How old are you?”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHF9WyYt-EUA23qBI8IxqttQFezcO9VEXuLZy6n8lzsjf1EkXmZl6FJAnMVeuw2Bg5QNVwltjaRRnansRLBeSEFLKpsgJI0wcsF0l5oL8yxQ438ESViF2iX5LGARfPmA83n-TXa=w491-h810-v0
“I am nine years old.”
“Did you only see Our Lady or did you also hear what she said?”
“I only saw her, I heard nothing of what she said.”
“Was there some light around her head?”
“Yes, there was.”
“Could you see her face well?”
“I could see, but only a little, because of the light.”
“Were there some ornaments on her dress?”
“There were some edgings of gold.”
“Of what color is the crucifix?”
“It is white.”
“And the chain of the rosary?”
“That also is white.”
“Would the crowd be sad if they knew the secret?”
“They would.”
Doctor Formigao believed that all three had told him the truth,
whatever the final explanation might be. He was inclined to think
that the test of whether or not they had been deluded in some
way would be the “miracle” promised by the Lady for October 13.
He went away resolving to let nothing keep him from being at
Cova da Iria on the day after the morrow.
Another priest who examined the children about that time was
Father Po^as, prior of Porto de Mos. It is Ti Marto who remembers
how brusquely this self-appointed inquisitor said to Lucia:
“Look here, girl, now you are going to tell me that all this
is lies and witchcraft. If you don’t say so, I will say it and have
it said everywhere. . . . Everybody will believe me . . . and you
shall not escape!”
Lucia made no reply. The Prior was furious, or he pretended
that he was. But in the end, after he had made every effort to
break down her calm reticence, after he had even accused Ti Marto
of being an accomplice in a gigantic fraud, he admitted that he
believed they were speaking the truth.
Yet when the attitude of a priest could be so distrustful and so
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHtBknC1WdaAdgKNRuHVENHCumjIUhYIt7oGJVzYA10e5WzzpE5Ep3YuRJ1r4rcSZ9SUTwGE5Tqba3GWPwt6cY8N79LmlFDNZhFBSbtAmXh9UWhK5OZRg5xcLqiwSabs6ZeD51zwg=w491-h810-v0
menacing, ic is no wonder that Maria Rosa was almost at her
wits’ end with fear and weariness. She was convinced that Lucia
was about to be exposed and punished at last. Indeed, all the
Aboboras but Lucia were in a state of something like panic when
that twelfth of October dawned over Aljustrel. Was it not bad
enough, reasoned Maria Rosa and her husband, that their child
had begun the deception in the first place; worse, that she had
stubbornly carried it on all these months; but worst of all, that
she had had the incredible effrontery to promise the whole world
a miracle, no less, at a definite hour on a definite day, the thirteenth
of October! And what would cheated people say and do when
the miracle did not occur? Undoubtedly they would turn in anger
on Lucia and tear her to pieces. Many of the villagers were making
similar predictions. One woman said that Lucia Abobora ought
to be burned before she caused the destruction of them all.
Maria Rosa made a last pathetic appeal to her daughter.
“It is better for us to go and tell everything,” she said. “People
say we are going to die tomorrow in the Cova da Iria. If the Lady
does not make the miracle, the crowd will kill us.”
“I am not afraid, Mother,” replied Lucia. “I am sure the Lady
will do everything she has promised.”
“We had better go to confession, to be prepared for death.”
“If you want me to go with you to confession, I will, but not
for that reason.”
Maria Rosa turned away, almost distracted.
That afternoon the sky became overclouded, and a fine cold
mist began to fall over the gloomy autumnal expanse of the Serra
da Aire. Shepherds in Aljustrel locked the beasts up early, for it
was plain that thick weather was brewing in the northeast.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGog8ZhvUdYuIK8kIV1LWrUYnHZNw1Lc5F-wL11aydOYY75JMF-7_66gjCeSK3rtcCflzJJwmuyaFNn0aLZCPq6Fvxh7w2Gct7xkVTbxRf6s5IgQ1lW24x-M_rUNxtxChb9-Jo2Ig=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER XIII
What a night! It was as i£ the devil, somewhere in the ice and
snow that could never slake the burning o£ his pain, had resolved
to destroy with one blow all that remained of the Europe which
had so long been his battleground against the Thing he hated
most. Somewhere in the dark misery of Siberia, he was permitted,
heaven knows why, to disturb the equilibrium of the air, setting
in motion a cold and cutting blast that shrieked across the continent
to the western sea. It may have passed howling over a cabin in
Finland where a little lynx-eyed man who called himself Lenin
was waiting to enter St. Petersburg (he had lately sown the seeds
of revolution there), and to begin, in a very few weeks, the trans¬
formation and destruction of all that world which owed what
was best and noblest in it to the teachings of Christ. It screamed
in mockery over vast armaments moving stealthily through
Germany to prepare for the “peace through victory” drive of 1918.
It scourged poor wretches of both armies into the cover of slimy
dugouts all along the western front, and plastered with mud the
Italian fugitives from Caporetto. It seemed to echo and enlarge
the despair that was settling over the vineyards of war-wearied
France, where Haig stood, as he said, with his back to the wall.
Finally it dashed itself against the Pyrenees, and then, as if it had
gathered up all the hatreds and discontents of disobedient men
and all the rebellious powers of a corrupted nature in its mad
career from the Baltic to Cape Saint Vincent, it let them all loose
on the little country that has never been permanently conquered,
the land where she who treads upon the serpent’s head has long
been honored, the terra da Santa Maria.
Darkness fell swiftly, with blacker clouds scudding from the
northeast, and huge shapeless masses of fog drifting along the
*39
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHZoA1cAMtIRSb_Qpk1ZR44rmJvCOtQX55B78p5La0FRYzg4kTsgS8xAqX__jBqidHzuuquERWMw1EjibSWQc_wpbgpb6kRFLsfl8U-YijjOg9DlNhJVT2hJ4QN6-jvWtfL_KA8OA=w491-h810-v0
mountain sides and down the river valleys to the ocean. As the
drizzle thickened to a fine, cold, slanting rain, the wind, whipped
to a gale, bent under it the waving and moaning plumes of the
pine forests near Leiria; it ripped the square sails of ancient wind¬
mills on the gray heights of the Serra da Aire; it scattered pale
glistening leaves of poplars and aspens across the swollen Tagus;
it flattened the plucked and reddened vineyards of Braga and the
withered gardens of Moita and Fatima; it went roaring across
hundreds of miles of narrow beaches until the frothy Atlantic
bellowed back in anger, and cast up vengeful floods into village
streets. The rain fell steadily, pitilessly.
Yet there were thousands of human beings and many beasts
on the roads of the little Republic that night. For faith is stronger
than doubt, and love is hardier than hate. Devout Catholics in
every village had heard by this time that Our Lady had promised
to return to Cova da Ina to perform a miracle on October 13. Rain
or shine, that was all they needed to know. Peasant families slung
their wicker baskets and earthen water jugs over their shoulders,
or packed them in panniers on the backs of burros, and started
out under the lowering skies. Fathers and mothers carried sick or
lame children in their arms for incredible distances. Fishermen
left their nets and boats on the beaches of the Vieira and took
tO'the oozy roads. Farmhands from Monte Real, sailors from ships
in the harbors of Porto or Algarve, factory workers from Lisboa,
serranas from Minde or Soublio, ladies and gentlemen, scrub¬
women, waiters, young and old, rich and poor, all sorts of people
(but most of them humble, most of them barefoot, most of them
workers and their families) were plodding through the mud under
the pelting rain that night, like a great scattered army converging
upon Fatima, hoping to find there some favor of health or con¬
version, forgiveness of sin, consolation for sorrow, the beginning
of a better life, the blessing of the Mother of God.
It made no difference to these devotees if saturated trousers or
skirts sloshed around their tired legs as their bare feet plowed
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGVPZiJISO2hpKCFTvUIo9N5uEDiW6yzxAyWOD5YSDjoqRokbjibz-diSx5v3tiufp4OQHNT15QjW__hT3VMFCnBHJOv9ocFYoM2ioYb9biyZrwyYpg5zWa1KPXy-OuZ_6tIVPB=w491-h810-v0
the mud or spattered the puddles of bad roads. Laughter was heard
among groups of several families as they walked along together.
Fragments of old hymns would echo back from the wet cliffs, or
come floating down out of the darkness of a lonely road. “Ave,
Ave, Ave Maria!” Not for nothing had the ancestors of these
people sung the Salve Regina on the decks of galleons in the
Indian Ocean or whalers in the China Sea. It might have been a
useful lesson for some of the politicians at Lisboa if they could
have heard those songs.
They were not left wholly uninformed, however. Avelino de
Almeida, managing editor of O Seculo, the largest newspaper in
Lisboa, who was on his way to cover the story at Cova da Iria,
described some of the pilgrims he met near Chao de Ma^as, before
the rain began to fall:
“Nearly all, men and women, have bare feet, the women carrying
their footgear in bags on their heads, the men leaning on great
staves and carefully grasping umbrellas also. One would say they
were all oblivious to what was going on about them, with a great
lack of interest in the journey and in other travelers, as if lost in a
dream, reciting their Rosary in a sad rhythmic chant. A woman says
the first part of the Hail, Mary; her companions in chorus say the
second part of the prayer. With sure and rhythmical steps they tread
the dusty road which runs between the pine woods and the olive
groves, so that they may arrive before night at the place of the
apparition, where, under the serene and cold light of the stars, they
hope they can sleep, keeping the first places near the blessed
azinheira so that today they can see better.”
It was not devotion that took the editor of O Seculo to Fatima.
Almeida was a Freemason who made no secret of his dislike for
priests, sacraments, creeds and dogmas. He was covering the story
because it had been too much talked about to be ignored, and he
was one of the best newspaper men in Portugal. His dispatch,
published in O Seculo on the morning of October 13, reveals him
as a kindly, cynical gentleman in the Newmanian sense, one who
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEYy4EbeMWsrgVwAETZDMoqaTfHIBnijhiMdXkuwHGDbKTFQl-UgvRr6YNE2M-xFe1ZDXcqloT5CwO79CpR_QWsfSofkb2tVSNvhB75Eg3kdnKfYpvTNJpqJrGec9cUq1PqFqicOA=w491-h810-v0
i^2 Our Lady of Fatima
did not believe but had no wish to hurt or ridicule those who did:
“Thousands of persons are hastening to a wild expanse of country
near Ourem to see and hear the Virgin Mary. Let pious souls be not
offended and pure believing hearts be not afraid; we have no
intention of being a scandal for those who sincerely hold to their
faith and whom the miraculous still attracts, seduces, bewitches,
consoles and fortifies, as has been the case for thousands of years,
and most certainly will be for other thousands of years! . . . This
is only a short newspaper article on an event which is not new in
the history of Catholicism. . . . Some regard it as a message from
heaven and a grace; others see in it a sign and proof that the spirit
of superstition and fanaticism has planted deep roots that it is
difficult or even impossible to destroy.
“Times of great calamities have always revived and renewed
religious ideas and have favored them. And war, which strikes
everywhere, offers them the most favorable and fertile soil for
growth. We see that confirmed in the life of the trenches and even
in the spiritual atmosphere of the belligerent countries.”
After some pointed observations about the speculators who
doubtless were waiting to profit by the credulity of the masses, he
gave a fair summary of the events at Fatima, and recalled previous
apparitions of the Holy Virgin at Lourdes, La Salette, and other
places. Then he continued more ironically:
“The miracle takes place between noon and one o’clock, according
to those who have been there. But not all have the chance to see the
holy figure. The number of the elect seems very small. Despite
their efforts, many see nothing. This is why those who find
themselves near the children are contented with hearing them speak
with an invisible partner. Others, on the contrary, see in a divinely
solemn moment the stars shining in the firmament, even though
the sun be at the zenith. They hear a subterranean groaning which
announces the presence of the Lady. They claim that the tem¬
perature falls and they compare the impressions of that moment
with those they have experienced during an eclipse of the sun. . . .
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFyUTMvcnEAl5Jr4XxsjCFoswE-KV8EJ_EzCTS2SxJTIf-spDRiu7UlKj5bH917F5FwvLcmSBGYkHILNyfm3f-Sd3Xr5tU4bu5trTv6Ux-PJgwMpdRKERWoNmdDTwehAfMal2Ks=w491-h810-v0
“According to what the children say, the figure of the Virgin
appears on an azinheira, surrounded on all sides by a nuage. . . .
The suggestion of the masses, brought there by the supernatural and
captivated by a superhuman force, is so powerful that eyes fill with
tears, faces become as pale as corpses, men and women throw
themselves on their knees, chant songs and recite the Rosary
together.
“We do not know if there have already been blind persons who
have recovered their sight, paralytics who have regained the use of
their limbs, hardened sinners who are turned back from the straight
ways of sin to plunge into the purifying water of penance.
“But that matters little. The news of the apparitions has spread
from Algarve to the Minho. Since the Day of the Ascension the
pilgrims have flocked there by thousands on the thirteenth of each
month, from near and far. The means of transportation do not
suffice.
“The clergy of the place and the neighborhood maintain, as
regards the events, a prudent reserve, at least in appearance. It is
the custom of the Church. It proclaims loudly that in such circum¬
stances doubt means nothing, for doubts also come from the devil.
But secretly it rejoices over the great concourse of pilgrims who
since May have become more and more numerous.
“And there are even people who dream of a great and magnificent
church, always full, of large hotels near by with every modern
comfort, of shops well stocked with a thousand and one different
objects of piety and souvenirs of Our Lady of Fatima, and of a
railway which will take us to the future miraculous sanctuary with
more convenience than the buses in which, for the moment, the
mass of the faithful and of the curious now achieve this right. . . .”
While the author of these pessimistic observations was making
his way to Ourem, and then with deepening discomfort to Cova
da Iria, the Abobora and Marto families, after a restless night
listening to the rain pelting on the tiles, were rising in the
cheerless dawn. Indeed, the east was hardly streaked with dismal
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF_FAh-5FYGM8A3bKPrYyyHPXeViGeAnncfj14paQMsQUxSx9N9zhNiTKILKi9BoTBem40lwi5UEin9Uas2vlyua5cDAzxGQc-581pAw-EcmcyBs9MSaMxHMhCBKlLBrkVdcWgChg=w491-h810-v0
144 Our Lady of Fatima
gray when the first dripping pilgrims came knocking at their
doors. Soon there were dozens and scores of them, and they not only
surrounded the two cottages, clamoring for a glimpse of the
children, but were cheerfully forcing their way inside without
waiting to be invited. Ti Olimpia was furious at the casual way
they shed puddles of water and red mud from the fields all over
her floors. Ti Marto still twits her on how she fluttered about,
trying to get the children ready and at the same time to answer
the questions of a jostling mob. It was too much when these
strangers began to make themselves comfortable on her beds and
chests.
“Get out of here, all of you!” she cried.
The people paid no attention. A few more pushed their way in.
“Leave them alone, woman,” advised her husband. “When the
house is full, no more will be able to get in.”
A neighbor plucked him by the sleeve and said in his ear:
“Ti Marto, you’d better not go to Cova da Ina. They might
beat you up. The little ones, no. They are babies, no one is
going to hurt them. You are the one in danger of being mussed up.”
“I’m going openly,” returned the other, “and I’m not afraid
of anybody. I have no doubt everything will be all right.”
Olimpia did not share this confidence. She was praying fer¬
vently to Our Lady to protect her and her family that day, and
she still wonders how her children could have remained so calm
and unafraid in the midst of all that confusion.
“If they hurt us,” said Jacinta, “we are going to heaven. But
those that hurt us, poor people, are going to hell.”
One of the intruders in the house of Ti Marto was a Baroness
from Pombalinho, who insisted on presenting two ornate dresses,
a blue one for Lucia, a white one for Jacinta. The girls declined
these, preferring their own white Communion attire. Finally,
after infinite confusion, they managed to get a bite to eat and
to squirm out of the house.
At the last moment Maria Rosa put on her shawl and said
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFHov0U0roZpP13T6AFKFOF4BbD3xVrj6IvMG0bS4lsOnQJYwsbs-MefmLcyIzgW9AMJLbvwXEJqgGfP7mHM5swvPp1O3Rtb_NE19kvKMUVF6BGejZK2enk1gNh0tKTBoesBelp=w491-h810-v0
she would accompany them. “I know they are going to kill you,”
she said tearfully to Lucia. “Very well, then, if you must go, I
will go and die with you.”
It was a long and slow journey. The highroad was crowded
all the way from Fatima to Cova da Iria. Men and women
were kneeling in the thick slime on both sides, imploring
their prayers. Hands reached out to touch them. Wet burros
brushed against them. Umbrellas threatened to poke out their eyes.
But what a sight when at last they arrived near the scene of the
apparitions! Fully 70,000 men, women and children, people of
all ages and conditions, were standing patiently in the rain waiting
for them—a dark mass under innumerable black umbrellas,
dripping sombreros, soaked blankets. They were packed so
densely between the highway and the azinheira that the children
were able to get through only with the help of a chauffeur, who
seized Jacinta and mounted her on his shoulder, crying, “Make
way for the children who saw Our Lady!”
Ti Marto followed with Lucia and Francisco. When they
reached the place of the apparitions, he was surprised to find his
wife already there. He had forgotten her in his anxiety for Jacinta.
“My Olimpia turned up from another direction, I don’t know
from where,” he confesses.
At all events there she was close to the stump of the azinheira,
which Maria Carreira had lovingly draped, along with her alms
table, under garlands of flowers. The crowd lurched and swayed
this way and that, ducked umbrellas, huddled together for warmth,
scanned the leaden eastern sky. Loud voices were repeating the
Rosaiy in various rhythmical cadences. A priest who had been pray¬
ing all night in the rain and mud was reading his breviary and
from time to time nervously fingering his watch. Presently he
turned to the children and asked at what hour Our Lady was
going to arrive.
“At midday,” replied Lucia.
He glanced at his watch again, and said, disapprovingly:
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG5pTOpT_jis0FR_EihfbGry_NKmckesV2ctLuQ47fhaEvpCGosKlGy8QjmGIQ-97BuMzxSqQbl4dbzWabKfbXeRB5-sro1aQaf8HhPBamgiVKHnB8DUtZ96gRp2b-EBxsSYxGaCw=w491-h810-v0
146 Our Lady of Fatima
“It is midday already. Our Lady is not a liar. We shall see.”
Nearly all the people now were saying the Rosary. “Ave, Maria,
cheia de graga . . . Santa Maria, Mai de Deus, rogai por nos
pecadores . .
“Put down your umbrellas!” cried Lucia—-why she never knew
—and one after another they obeyed, although the rain was still
falling. “Put down your umbrellas!” said one after another. They
all stood patiently in the rain.
A few minutes more passed. The priest looked at his watch
again.
“Midday is past,” he said with gloomy finality. “Away with
all this! It is all an illusion.”
He began to push the three children with his hands, if we may
trust the memory of Maria Carreira.1 But Lucia, almost in tears,
refused to budge, saying:
“Whoever wants to go, can go, but I’m not going. Our Lady
told us to come. We saw her other times and we’re going to see
her now.”
Disappointed murmurs and grumblings began to be heard among
the bystanders. Then of a sudden Lucia looked toward the east
and cried:
“Jacinta, kneel down, for now I see Our Lady there. I can
see the flash!”
“Watch out, daughter!” It was the shrill voice of Maria Rosa.
“Don’t let yourself be deceived!”
Lucia did not hear the warning. Those near her noticed that
her face had become flushed and transparently beautiful. She was
gazing rapturously now at the Lady herself, who stood in a flood
of white light on the flowers that Maria Carreira had draped on
the stump of the azinheira. Jacinta and Francisco, on either side
of her, stared likewise, both radiant, both quite oblivious of the
multitude around them.
1 De Marchi, p. 175.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFoRbEctVFEJ_oHLUlCymfl8HJYkH5AYzFLeXWbErzJJTz8dk4G-8x-CrxgCoruSaoJ6rgJnRw5Ego9utrqEbkHMHdNYWVOX5VP2VyYHttnqXDQQwI9a6gduypLmFX0IB_wSWpWUA=w491-h810-v0
“What do you want of me?” Lucia was kneeling with the
others. The fine rain fell on her upturned face.
“I want to tell you to have them build a chapel here in my
honor. I am the Lady of the Rosary. Let them continue to say the
Rosary every day. The war is going to end, and the soldiers will
soon return to their homes.”
“I have many things to ask of you,” said Lucia. “The cure of
some sick persons, the conversion of some sinners. . . .”
“Some yes, others no. It is necessary that they amend their
lives, and ask pardon for their sins.”
Her face became graver as she continued, “Let them offend
Our Lord God no more, for He is already much offended.”
With this the Lady of the Rosary opened her white hands as
always, and it seemed to Lucia that the light emerging from them
ascended, to where the sun ought to be, directly overhead, and it
was brighter than any sunlight. Perhaps it was at this moment
that the crowd saw the clouds separate like two vast curtains
rolled apart, and the sun appear between them in the clear
blue, like a disk of white fire. Certainly many heard Lucia cry,
“Look at the sun!” but she said this in ecstacy and has no
recollection of it. For she was wholly absorbed in something she
saw where the sun must have been.
As Our Lady disappeared in the very radiance that came from
her outstretched hands, there stood out in the zenith above three
tableaus which symbolized, one after another, the Joyous, the
Sorrowful and the Glorious mysteries of the Rosary. The first was
a distinct representation of the Holy Family: Our Lady herself
in her traditional dress of white with a blue mantle, and Saint
Joseph beside her holding the Child Jesus on his arm—Saint
Joseph in white, the Infant in bright red.
Lucia was heard to say, “Saint Joseph is going to bless us!”
All three of the children saw this first vision, and saw the Saint
make the sign of the cross three times over the crowd. The holy
Child did likewise.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE89teB-7M8h4ee3VlNW56ZZh4QtyPY5olar6ZvKcRD7pMEzQdq7ao_wvDijqMvFsm9h1Q3d87Yq_TCkvvboUZ11AFccYMYd2NGYHcoQmfPMagKvh0RIcl8zCb4vCpPIhtmYBGe=w491-h810-v0
iq8 Our Lady of Fatima
The next vision, seen by Lucia alone, was one of Our Lady
of Sorrows in the sombre garb assigned to her by tradition, the
Mater Dolorosa of Good Friday, but without the sword in her
breast; and beside her stood her divine Son grieving as when he
met her on the way to Calvary. Lucia saw only the upper part of
His figure. He looked pityingly on the crowd for whom He had
died, and raised His hand to make the sign of the cross over them.
Our Lady then appeared in a third vision of glory, as Our
Lady of Mount Carmel, crowned as queen of heaven and of
the world, her infant Son upon her knee.
The crowd saw nothing of all this: at least there seems to be
no solid verification of the claim that a few saw the Lady. What
they all did see, however, was something stupendous, unheard of,
almost apocalyptic. The sun stood forth in the clear zenith like
a great silver disk which, though bright as any sun they had ever
seen, they could look straight at without blinking, and with a
unique and delightful satisfaction. This lasted but a moment.
While they gazed, the huge ball began to “dance”—that was the
word all the beholders applied to it. Now it was whirling rapidly
like a gigantic fire-wheel. After doing this for some time, it
stopped. Then it rotated again, with dizzy, sickening speed.
Finally there appeared on the rim a border of crimson, which
flung across the sky, as from a hellish vortex, blood-red streamers of
flame, reflecting to the earth, to the trees and shrubs, to the up¬
turned faces and the clothes all sorts of brilliant colors in succession:
green, red, orange, blue, violet, the whole spectrum in fact. Madly
gyrating in this manner three times, the fiery orb seemed to tremble,
to shudder, and then to plunge precipitately, in a mighty zigzag,
toward the crowd.
A fearful cry broke from the lips of thousands of terrified persons
as they fell upon their knees, thinking the end of the world had
come. Some said that the air became warmer at that instant;
they would not have been surprised if everything about them had
burst .into flames, enveloping and consuming them.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH9V-nPQvJ3ZczIPLEdA_QrYAdoG9bj3eWjoQKzFsEUyWKG-CNrbb5YLJMvRSD8wka632T2OZQTttD9CTmm5coU5EOlnR-SJfm5Uyr9PDDIotFFNSp5OvaGlc7RsgmsYddi1MU7ng=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 149
“Ai Jesus, we are all going to die here!”
“Save us, Jesus! Our Lady, save us!”
“Oh, my God, I am sorry—” And one began the Act of Con¬
trition.
Some who had come to jeer fell on their faces and broke into
sobs and abject prayers.
The Marques do Cruz said, “Oh my God, how great is Thy
power!”
This had lasted about ten minutes, perhaps. Then all saw the
sun begin to climb, in the same zigzag manner, to where it had
appeared before. It became tranquil, then dazzling. No one could
look at it any longer. It was the sun of every day.
The people stared at one another in joy and amazement.
“Miracle! Miracle! The children were right! Our Lady made the
miracle! Blessed be God! Blessed be Our Lady!” The shouts were
taken up all over the Cova da Ina. Some were laughing, others
weeping with joy. Many were making the discovery that their
drenched clothes had in some unexplained manner become per¬
fectly dry.
Avelino de Almeida reported the event in O Seculo of October
17 as “a spectacle unique and incredible if one had not been a
witness of it. . . . One can see the immense crowd turn toward
the sun, which reveals itself free of the clouds in full noon. The
great star of day makes one think of a silver plaque, and it is
possible to look straight at it without the least discomfort. It does
not burn, it does not blind. It might be like an eclipse. But now
bursts forth a colossal clamor, and we hear the nearest spectators
crying, ‘Miracle, miracle! Marvel, marvel!’
“Before the astonished eyes of the people, whose attitude carries
us back to biblical times and who, full of terror, heads uncovered,
gaze into the blue of the sky, the sun has trembled, and the
sun has made some brusque movements, unprecedented and out¬
side of all cosmic laws—the sun has ‘danced,’ according to the
typical expression of the peasants. . . . An old man whose stature
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG24DabglsRfgRR0TgJ8NCNmflpev2oINWDgHBe0kj4Onn1R32e0FrCk8C_RrY7VNOnOgfNP2CJZtCUh5H9ORiPtTpQ3L1go-CRKFzfrFLjdGxPecgTdkY7GQg4wKPHatI_kHwqbw=w491-h810-v0
*5° Our Lady of Fatima
and face, at once gentle and energetic, recall those of Paul
Deroulede, turns toward the sun and recites the Credo with
loud cries from beginning to end. I ask his name. It is Senhor
Joao Maria Amado de Melo Ramalho da Cunha Vasconcelos. I
see him afterwards addressing those about him who have kept
their hats on, begging them vehemently to uncover before so
extraordinary a demonstration of the existence of God. Similar
scenes are repeated in all places. . . .
“The people ask one another if they have seen anything and
what they have seen. The greatest number avow that they have
seen the trembling and dancing of the sun. Others, however,
declare that they have seen the smiling face of the Virgin herself;
swear that the sun turned around on itself like a wheel of fireworks;
that it fell, almost to the point of burning the earth with its rays.
. . . Another tells that he has seen it change color successively. . . .
“Almost three o’clock. The sky is limpid and the sun follows
its course with its habitual brilliancy so that no one dares to look
at it directly. And the shepherds? . . . Lucia, the one who speaks
to the Virgin, announces with theatrical motions, on the neck
of a man who carries her from group to group, that the war is
going to end and that the soldiers are coming home. Such news,
however, does not increase the joy of those who hear her. The
celestial Sign, that is everything. Much curiosity, nevertheless,
to see the two little girls with their garlands of roses; some try
to kiss the hand of the ‘little saints’; and one of the two, Jacinta,
is much nearer to fainting than to dancing. But what all aspired
for—the Sign in the Sky—has sufficed to satisfy them, to enroot
them in their Breton-like faith. . . .
“Their dispersion follows rapidly and without incidents, with¬
out the shadow of disorder, without the need of any intervention
of police patrols. The pilgrims who leave first, in haste to be on
their way, are those who arrived first with their shoes on then-
heads or hung on their staves. They are going, their souls full of
joy, to spread the good news in the villages that were not wholly
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGAdWNQT2o3Vs7T19XQtuRS_-pj1gtQuUdBMF5uqvsgD3jbyP7UsENXoAZJsfpp1WYLlKteujF9Mi8Li_nyO5JvDUDip2NpgmdjzvMxpoakiKlg8jN612FgZo0-QF0Z4gx0Mklx=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 151
depopulated to come here. And the priests? Some have shown
themselves on the scene, standing rather with the curious spectators
than in the company of pilgrims avid for celestial favors. Perhaps
now and then one does not manage to conceal the satisfaction
which appears so often on the faces of those who triumph. . . .
It remains for those competent to pronounce on the danse macabre
of the sun, which today, at Fatima, has made hosannas burst from
the breasts of the faithful and naturally has impressed—so witnesses
worthy of belief assure me—even freethinkers and other persons
not at all interested in religious matters who have come to this
once famous countryside.”
All over Portugal, in fact, the anti-clerical press was compelled
to bear witness of the same sort. There was general agreement on
the essentials. As Dr. Domingos Pinto Coelho wrote in O Ordem,
“The sun, sometimes surrounded with crimson flames, at other
times aureoled with yellow and red, at still other times seemed
to revolve with a very rapid movement of rotation, still again
seeming to detach itself from the sky, to approach the earth and
to radiate strong heat.”
Theories of mass hypnotism or suggestion were discarded when
it became known that reliable witnesses not in the crowd had
seen the miracle many miles away. The poet Affonso Lopes Vieira
saw it from his house at S. Pedro de Moel, forty kilometers from
Fatima. Father Inacio Lourenco told later how he had seen it from
Albunta, eighteen or nineteen kilometers away, when he was a boy
of nine. He and some fellow students heard people shouting in
the street near by. Running out of the school with his teacher,
Dona Delfina Pereira Lopes, he saw with amazement the spinning
and falling of the sun. “It was like a globe of snow revolving on
itself,” he wrote. “Then suddenly it seemed to come down in a
zigzag, threatening to fall on the earth. Terrified, I ran to shelter
myself in the midst of the people. All were weeping, expecting
from one moment to the next the end of the world.
“Near us was an unbeliever without religion, who had spent
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE17b_O3UW9kGV6ajBRoUHbWqhjLtBxYX-Dco6ry6KvFwn5ep66sLb_Aapq8MLzu48CEyKw0qyPfVfoe1lXg4r_s1MSMTDhP46ne8trPtn9Kl5EFkxPIGPm5OZ7NYZtRaGA7PCa0Q=w491-h810-v0
x52 Our Lady of Fatima
the morning mocking the blockheads who had made all that
journey to Fatima to go and stare at a girl. I looked at him. He
stood as if paralyzed, thunderstruck, his eyes fixed on the sun.
Then I saw him tremble from head to foot, and raising his hands
to heaven, he fell on his knees in the mire, shouting, ‘Nossa
Senbora! Nossa SenboraF
“Meanwhile the people continued to scream and cry out, begging
God to pardon their sins. . . . Afterwards we ran to the chapels
of the town, which were filled in a few moments.
“During those long minutes of the solar phenomenon objects
all about us reflected all the colors of the rainbow. As we looked
at one another, one seemed blue, another yellow, another vermilion.
. . . All these strange phenomena increased the terror of the crowd.
After about ten minutes the sun returned to its place in the same
way it had descended, still pale and without splendor . . .”
Plenty of witnesses are still living in the neighborhood. I spoke
with many of them last summer, including Ti Marto and his
Olimpia, Maria Carreira, two of the sisters of Lucia (Mary of
the Angels and Gloria) and several others of the country folk,
all of whom told the same story with evident sincerity; and as
they mentioned the falling of the sun there was always a trace
of terror in their voices. The Reverend Father Manuel Pereira
da Silva gave me substantially the same details. “When I saw
the sun fall zigzag,” he said, “I fell on my knees. I thought the
end of the world had come.”
The fact has been established beyond any doubt. How is it to
be explained?
As early as May, 1917, Jacinta and Lucia had told people that
the Lady they saw had promised a miracle on October 13, at the
hour of noon, as a sign of their sincerity. They had repeated this
at various times, and had never altered their story even under
threats and persecution which must have been terrifying to such
children at the ages of ten, nine, and seven. On the very day
and hour they had foretold, some 70,000 persons testified that they
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG6FNiI-RUlGDVQVgXfJZg5l1atwgiqGEFeT-b5tNxdyi1DCqPFzzy__8-JgtUmBdVRRUWP7HQNOfJBKu5VcIfcXjcqk0HsYdtbi667aEGLo3b3GbbTW1t_OOkSD47V4dLRWO4WMQ=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 153
had the unique experience of seeing the sun spin round and seem
to fall. Such widespread testimony serves to confirm that the chil¬
dren actually had seen the Mother of Christ, and that He had
given to the simple souls at Cova da Iria the sign in the sky for
which the Pharisees had begged Him in mock reverence, and which
He had refused to grant their unbelieving and adulterous hearts.
The Administrator of Ourem still denies that anything miracu¬
lous happened. I suspect he would have denied it even if he had
been there. Or like the Pharisees who denied the Resurrection
after they had seen Christ dying on the cross, he would have
made up some rationalistic explanation to save himself the humilia¬
tion of believing.
He was removed from office following the coup d’etat of
Sidonio Pais some two months after the miracle. The last heard of
him was that he was injured in Tomar by the premature explosion
of a bomb he was making to throw at certain members of the
new government.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGloJorIN0UfsprgNLiPy8DRliihqRjg7wgTkIwO206POdXq8weU6_yi-lLNJbCHDcmAUF9J1o6MC2Mlu63MSGLssoJZ4dOIaqOEH_oifFm7f5EabcqRF1tQ8IYQr4lekAd25gZFA=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER XIV
Lucia has drawn the mantle of a charitable silence over the
reactions of her family to the events of October 13. There must
have been apologies and acts of reparation, furtive, perhaps, on
the part of Antonio, honest and flatfooted on that of Maria
Rosa. But on that day the wan and spiritless girl had no time
to enjoy her triumph. Mobs of pilgrims followed her about all
afternoon. They were still milling about the street and passing
in and out of the houses of the Aboboras and the Martos when
Dr. Formigao arrived in Aljustrel at seven o’clock in the evening.
He wanted to talk with the three children before anyone else did,
and before they could compare notes. Thanks to his authority as
a priest he dispersed the strangers in short order, and then sum¬
moned the three principals to the house of Ti Marto, where he
questioned them separately.
All three had seen Our Lady stand on the stump of the tree.
Lucia and Jacinta were agreed as to what she said. Francisco had
seen her but had not heard her speak. All three had seen the sun
turn. All had seen, near the sun, the vision of the Holy Family.
Only Lucia had seen the two succeeding tableaus of Our Lady
of Sorrows and Our Lady of Mount Carmel. All agreed as to
the colors of the garments and other details. There were some
discrepancies. Was the Infant Jesus large? No, very little, replied
each one separately. But Lucia believed he was on the arm of
Saint Joseph, while both Jacinta and Francisco saw him standing
beside him—on the right side, said Jacinta, and he did not come
up to the waist of Saint Joseph. To Lucia he seemed about one
year old. To Jacinta and Francisco he was about the age of a
baby of the neighborhood, Deolinda de Jose das Neves, who
was .two years old.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHGsclZzNofkkB8Q0mRCQYU_QuLsb2zTw22gvzUHeLItIQR4Py3sDWv0Khf1CkIqGAtoL-F10g4-fyOnxXE5fBY8fR2lxqoqij5E9lekGE-P-D8vhxdsaZtexqQfIn_NLYB7qdwhg=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 155
The divergence regarding the position of the Child is the only-
important one, and I confess I do not know how to explain it.
In all such visions there is a subjective element, and it may be
that they present different details to different persons.
Dr. Formigao made one more attempt to learn the secret from Francisco.
“Which was brighter, the figure of the Virgin or the sun?”
he asked.
“The figure of the Virgin was brighter.”
“Did you hear what she said?”
“I heard nothing.”
“Who told you the secret? The Lady?”
“No, it was Lucia.”
“Can you tell it to me?”
1 cannot,
“You don’t want to speak, because you are afraid of Lucia, you
are afraid she will strike you, isn’t it true?”
“Oh, no!”
“Then, why can’t you tell it to me? . . . Would it be a sin,
perhaps?”
“I believe that it would be a sin to reveal the secret.”
“Is the secret for the good of your soul, and Lucia’s and
Jacinta’s?”
“Yes.”
“Is it also for the good of the soul of the Senhor Prior?”
“I don’t know.”
“Would the people be sad if they happened to learn it?”
“Yes.”
The children were so pale from fatigue and dazed from excite¬
ment that Dr. Formigao shortened his examination, fearing they
would be ill if they were not given some rest. When he returned
October 19, they were still so exhausted that they answered me¬
chanically, like sleepwalkers. Lucia’s memory was vague on recent
events, though accurate about those in the past. The questioner
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEmMSWx_Z2st30gYpOQoQX7SuQV9G-g5B8e6E29dfCOV_GruBuGQIaXVGfdsEaHBDk9Z_3ejmnwd2_wSdcC3I9x2Vuo8sbc-FQqyk7YJj-cypLEPBdUx1HpLuIj2vEZzVyFg41E=w491-h810-v0
i56 Our Lady of Fatima
was convinced that all three had answered honestly. He had seen
the miracle of the sun. He went away believing also in the appari¬
tions; and from then on he was a defender of the children even
in the face of a persistent persecution, all the more difficult to
understand when the prime movers in it happened to be not
Carbonari or Masons, but fellow Catholics, fellow priests.
As for the liberal opposition, the first stupefied silence of the
Carbonari lasted but a few days. “What are we about?” said the
children of this world on another occasion. “For this Man is
working many miracles. If we let Him go on like this everybody
will believe in Him!” Within a week the Grand Orient lodge of
Santarem had recovered sufficiently to plan not merely a defense
but a counter-attack. On the night of October 23 several of the
brethren, including one known as Cemetery Frank, went to Ourem,
where they were reinforced by certain henchmen of the Adminis¬
trator Santos. All then repaired by automobile to Cova da Ina
with the intention of destroying what remained of the azinheira
tree, and thus killing the cult by robbing it of a rallying point
and chief relic. Some carried lanterns, others axes' and hatchets.
A few strokes close to the roots, and a small tree was lying
flat on the ground. Near by were other paraphernalia of devotion:
the table of Maria Carreira with flowers and coins on it, and a
picture of Our Lady; the rustic arch that pilgrims had built of
two upright poles, with one hanging between to support a couple
of lanterns and some crosses. All these the raiding party confiscated
and carried off to Santarem. They placed them on exhibition as
medieval monstrosities in a house near the seminary, charging
a modest fee to inspect them, and offering the proceeds to the
manager of the Misericordia, who, however, declined. The next
evening they bore the entire exhibit in procession through the
streets, singing blasphemous litanies to the accompaniment of
drums.
The Liberal and Masonic O Seculo of Lisboa published these
and other details, with a hearty condemnation of the whole des-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG6CZUJi1jeS9sZrz_-EbI0dydrGxPg_6p-v7MWnhJrE6MkOA1pFbpwPkoBPH23MRkwVcW7w2pikQ09xf3h2PkNkq_6IOFTumJ-4MkEXU4NiKbMJ0ACNLYjsb2DA5YjBRguitta=w491-h810-v0
l57 Our Lady of Fatima
ecration, remarking that it was especially shameful at a time
when Catholic processions were forbidden. Other anti-clericals were
less tolerant. When a group of educated Catholics of Santarem
published an indignant protest, the Portuguese Federation of Free
Thinkers retorted with one of the most curious documents in Portu¬
guese history, a Manifesto addressed to all liberals against “the
shameful spectacle staged as a ridiculous comedy at Fatima,” which
they ascribed to an ecclesiastical plot to unite Church and State
and restore diplomatic relations with the Vatican. In his fervor
the writer went so far as to declare that miracles ought to be
punished like transgressions against city ordinances, since they
were violations of the laws of nature. He was particularly incensed,
because the miracle of the sun was invented and perpetrated on
the anniversary of the Freethinker Francisco Ferrer. Demanding
prompt public action against all those guilty of dragging such
medievalism into the light of the twentieth century, he concluded
with_L
“Long live the Republic!
Down with reaction!
Long live liberty!”
On the morning of October 24 the news of the ravishing of
the shrine passed rapidly from mouth to mouth through the grape¬
vine of the Serra. There were cries of anger in Moita, in Fatima,
in Aljustrel. Maria Carreira was one of the faithful who hurried
to Cova da Ina to see what had happened. Ai! the worst had
happened. The table, the arch, the lanterns, all had disappeared.
Yet not the worst! For the marauders had chopped down the wrong
tree. And there, a few feet from the uprooted one, stood the brave
little azinheira on which Our Lady had appeared, its upper leaves
sadly shorn, but the trunk and lower branches still standing in
the sun for all to see. Maria Carreira gave thanks to God.
The net result of the outrage was to increase rather than dis-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEwhODDRmgMadg7T36bUWBIxRph-OHYVdUnBM9G5RS7iBgwAuOtmM5Nq_fv7OP8duckaQVwXutV4dPV5oIA1BgoqnoAmAP6dgAV6zUh9hk_5Gs-wHN5sSdyh4nGzhBQOaSNvvgJnQ=w491-h810-v0
158 Our Lady of Fatima
courage the devotion to Our Lady of Fatima. The number of
pilgrims gradually increased. There were sure to be many of them
on Sundays and on the thirteenth of each month from May to
October, sometimes in a veritable procession from Leiria, Ourem,
or Chao de Ma^as. Even during the week it was a rare day that
did not bring at least a few. The barefoot poor still predominated;
many were sick, lame, brokenhearted, all hopeful that if they
could but touch the bark of the azinheira, the Queen of Heaven
would have pity on them. One cold winter morning Maria
Carreira found a man who had slept all night on the ground near
the tree, after walking eleven leagues. “I am glad I came,” he
said. “I feel very happy in this place.”
Along with the devout poor came a few more prosperous persons,
sometimes from as far as Lisboa or Porto. Almost every day one
would appear at the Martos’ or Aboboras’ and ask for a few words
with the children. At first Olimpia used to send out to the meadows
for Jacinta and Francisco, but this got to be such a nuisance that
she finally lost patience, and decided to turn the flock over to her
son Joao. The two were greatly disappointed, for it meant giving
up, in great measure, the company of Lucia. But before long
she too ceased to be a shepherdess.
Maria Rosa and her husband were too human to have been
transformed into angels by the stupefying experience they had
shared on October 13. Miracle or no miracle, Antonio bitterly
resented the fact that the vast crowd had increased, if possible,
the destruction of his farm property in the Cova. Nothing would
ever grow there now, especially with pilgrims coming to camp
out or walk about daily. It was no small sacrifice for a farmer of
Aljustrel to lose fifty sacks or more of potatoes a year, not to
mention his beans, spinach and other vegetables. Maria Rosa
remained irascible to the end, for it was her temperament. But
she was too honest to deny that Lucia had been right, and too
devout, having made the admission, to refuse to do all in her
power to carry out the wishes of the Mother of God. If Our
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH_9FGSNaSmrOBBPun7KCEOV2dTF4LFads_67vFrsnCfscAnoe2xlL5bmp8mawCrf3xbP8cSty_UYMbg8i9-x0sInnZ9GR_iAJDZrZuYITU-T3_m4jYq8fArXj8KpKEllPlGFzB=w491-h810-v0
*59 Our Lady of Fatima ■ • ' ‘ ' I
Lady wanted the cacbopa to learn to read, there was nothing more
to be said. Since the time of the monarchy there had been a small
day school for boys at Fatima, near the church. Recently, by a
happy coincidence, one had been started there for girls. Maria
Rosa entered Lucia, and prevailed upon her sister-in-law to send
Jacinta also.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQElY63JWA9rKMgwf8CnudjgbWDvKKFdZvsPkCTLk3YVc6p6OQnqahJssuOOPJD03rOyiFcIhKspBPiFknc4SO428iirHZT4Zd-88t0lQaGLAADh94v9CuzCyyTloLSZlz_gtj5Y2g=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER XV
Francisco was left alone now, but he was never lonely. He was
never without a calm sense of the presence of God. He never
tired of seeing the rising and the setting of the sun. He could
go with the girls on holidays to say the Rosary at Cova da Iria
or the Angel’s prayer at Cabeco, scampering over walls and
ditches at the first glimpse of anyone who looked like a curious
pilgrim.
Sometimes he was caught before he could escape. One day a
whole group of such persons surprised him, with his sister and
his cousin, at a bend of the road. They at once recognized and
surrounded the three. One set Jacinta on top of a wall, so that all
might see and hear her better. Another tried to do likewise with
Francisco. More nimble, he fled to the top of another old wall
near by, whence, looking back in triumph, he saw a poorly clad
woman and her young son kneeling and holding out their arms
to him in supplication. The mother, begged him to ask Our Fady
to heal her husband, who was ill, and not to let him be sent
to the war. Francisco knelt on top of the wall and began to say
his Rosary. The strangers all joined in.
“Afterwards they accompanied us to Cova da Iria,” wrote Fucia,
“and said another Rosary on the way. The poor woman promised
to return and thank Our Fady. She did, various times, and brought
her husband, who was restored to health. They were of the parish
of San Mamede, and we called them the Casaleiros.” 1
Most strangers bored Francisco. What silly questions! One of
the favorites was the one inflicted on small boys everywhere in
the world: What are you going to be when you grow up? Such a
160
1 Memoir IV, p. 25.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG2BJP82jBUyOYK4bprBtmC2djC4a00wOXPmNVsCMPq-rKZxaQlIBu_Use8RLRLK3Up1ud55xIFn91l5LZLuyj2WUjBwn7nPjbUYmVB-setsPkb6SHKqfQDUQylKHo7HV35DCNMAA=w491-h810-v0
query, for him, entailed too much explanation. There were those
two stuffy senhoras, for example.
“Do you want to be a carpenter?”
“No, ma’am.”
“Ah, you want to be a soldier, then?”
“No, ma’am.”
“A doctor, isn’t that it?”
“Oh, no!”
“I know what you would like to be—a priest!”
“No.”
“What! To say Mass? ... to hear confessions? ... to pray
in the church? Isn’t that it?”
“No, senhora. I don’t want to be a padre.”
“Then what do you want to be?”
“I don’t want to be anything.”
“You don’t want to be anything?!”
“No. I want to die and go to heaven.” 2
Francisco had no ambition to go to school with Jacinta and
Lucia. What was the use, if he was going to heaven so soon?
But he liked to walk with them as far as Saint Anthony’s Church
in Fatima. Then he would say:
“Look, you go to school and I will stay here in the church
near the hidden Jesus. It isn’t worth the trouble for me to learn
to read. I’m leaving here soon for heaven. When you come back,
call me.”
The church was being repaired, and the Sacred Host had been
moved from the main altar to a small one on the left side, near
the entrance. “And there I found him when I returned,” said
Lucia. He used to spend whole days on his knees looking at the
tabernacle where his Lord was waiting for someone to come and
visit Him. It is likely enough that in this way, without direction,
Francisco learned to practice mental prayer. He may well have
2 Another of Ti Marto’s recollections, in De Marchi, p. 211.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF8hIeNwuP6yxJ3otcuClzWIBS3mvcsr3sZMYjN100DWR2Vf4oACRs-tfZrrZkYkgGzs2piNza3IwXdM-GvbQb4lKvg5j4wTJ3tBdNgxgLU2r09ygJ1BjvcK1hhHw4VBWYKvgXACg=w491-h810-v0
become a fairly advanced contemplative, he may possibly have
had ecstacies. He had learned from the Master Himself the lesson
that Saint Teresa teaches in her Way of Perfection: that lofty
prayer demands love, solitude, detachment, freedom from all self-
seeking or sensuality.
Yet he never paraded his piety, but concealed it, even from
Jacinta. One day after school when the girls lost sight of him on
the Serra, they found him lying prostrate and motionless behind
a stone wall.
“Why don’t you come and pray with us?”
“I’d rather pray alone, to think, and to console Our Lord. He
is so sad.”
“Francisco, which do you like better, to console Our Lord or
to convert sinners so that their souls won’t go to hell any more?”
This was a more profound theological question than Lucia may
have realized, but he answered without hesitation:
“I’d rather console Our Lord.”
“Don’t you remember then how sad Our Lady was the last
month when she said not to offend Our Lord, because He was
much offended already?”
“I want to console Our Lord first and then convert the sinners
so that they won’t offend any more.”
One day he was missing so long that Jacinta thought he was
lost. “Francisco! Francisco!” No answer. Finally they discovered
him, prostrate and motionless, behind a pile of rocks. Still no
answer. He hardly stirred even when they shook him, and when
he finally got up, he seemed hardly'to know where he was. He
explained that he had been saying the prayer of the Angel, and
then had remained there thinking.
“And didn’t you hear Jacinta calling you?”
“I? No, I heard nothing.”
Francisco’s prayer was not a form of self-indulgence, like that
of the pseudo-mystics. There was nothing in it of what Saint
John of the Cross calls “spiritual gluttony.” Rather, it flowered
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHXSb6eAvTdGmRKzLxf0_zZy4YDtciXMXG5pwBNkJd2zMqjtXbYakIdnLNDLCYm8N0uNnj_uSd4iH1V5mwAJTtqqkhoDgQ4tiaTacw2e33NUanspbGqzd8xGgTw-OSXhQAohLynHw=w491-h810-v0
radiantly into good works for the benefit of others. He would go
out and gather up the sheep and goats of a certain poor old woman
who had trouble managing them. He obtained notable cures and
conversions. He could never resist any honest appeal. Just as he
had once offered a boy two vintens to release a captive bird, and
had run all the way to Aljustrel and back to fetch the money,
so now he would spare himself no trouble to free some struggling
soul from sin or pain. One day on the way to school Lucia met
her sister Teresa, recently married, who had come from Lomba,
where she now lived, with a request for prayers. The son of a
woman there had been arrested and falsely accused of a grave
crime for which he might be exiled or imprisoned for many years.
After Teresa had passed along to her mother’s house, Lucia told
the others what she had said.' Francisco was visibly moved. When
they reached Fatima he said:
“Look, while you two are at school I will stay with the hidden
Jesus and ask for this grace.”
When school was, over the girls found him kneeling before the
Santissimo. “Did you tell Our Lady about that?” asked Lucia.
“Yes, and you can tell your sister Teresa that the boy will be
home again in a few days.”
So it came to pass; and the woman of Lomba was at Cova da
Iria on the thirteenth of the next month, giving thanks for her
son’s release.
For such favors Francisco paid the price that all the mystics
pay. His great desire, next to heaven, was to receive the hidden
Jesus in Holy Eucharist. This became almost a burning pain
when he saw his sister Jacinta going to her First Communion.
They had begun''preparing for it together the previous summer.
Ti Marto remembers it well; it was soon after the Prior had
questioned them about the apparitions. “Senhor Prior,” he said,
“here are my two children, ready for their first confession. Now
you can ask them all the questions you want!” Afterwards he
took them to be examined for their First Communion, but Father
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHNyFMqWzc7Eo_qn07UNSGIcerS_uxK51OiWRPImG1CU8bu-LTDwC4dmREPHcPZB7OkiGPiVdmEyj-5kHh5kqYUKMyX5nMoOD7sc81eC7aSVMLltw4AqDNCWD87kZXPx_Umvem7mA=w491-h810-v0
Ferreira thought they had better wait another year. Jacinta finally
passed in May, 1918; but Francisco failed again when he became
confused about some point in the Credo. This time he went home
crying. It was hard enough for a boy of ten to fail, but harder
still to sit with the grown-ups on a fragrant spring day and watch
his younger sister go up without him. But the pain of separation
is familiar to the lovers of God, and Francisco bore it bravely
as he bent once more to his prayers. “It is for your love, O my
Jesus!”
It is plain from Lucia’s memoirs that she recognized a certain
spiritual leadership in this boy who was her junior. Just before
Lent in 1918 some of her friends asked her to organize one of the
festas of Carnival Week, leading up to the frivolities of Mardi
Gras. It was the custom for a group of boys and girls to meet at
a certain place, bringing oil, bread or meat from home, and then
to feast and dance till late at night. Jose Carreira and his wife
offered the use of their house for what promised to be the best
party of the year. Girls were coming from Moita, Fatima, Silva
dos Currais, Lomba, Pederneia, Cura da Pedra, Cosa Velha, all
over the Serra. “I refused at first, but, carried away by a cowardly
condescension, I gave in to their insistent demands.” Yet Lucia’s
conscience troubled her, and she told her cousins.
Francisco’s dark eyes looked her sternly through and through.
“And you are going back to these kitchen parties and games?
Flave you forgotten that you promised never to go back to them?”
“I don’t want to go, but you can see that they keep asking
me, and I don’t know what to do.”
“Do you know what you are going to do? All the people
know that Our Lady appeared to you. Just say that for that you
have promised not to dance any more, and so you are not going.
Then we can escape these days to the cave of Cabego, and nobody
will meet us.”
On the day of the party they were all at Cova da Iria, saying
the Rosary.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHPd5LjHj1cL0V-ckxW9T7QHsCiqGla8mv6m9u2hJTbEwf1LNFsb4TpZxo3okpeoRc3OZTaTLJHCZI0fk2wABQ6xMIIkFcqzSrViLvctfo3Hw0lElYbNcCqz9GYNF1vZoD8_qkRWQ=w491-h810-v0
Lucia’s godfather, Anastacio, one of the few in Aljustrel who
did not have to work for a living, had a rather worldly wife named
Teresa. One Sunday afternoon she saw the children passing, and
cried, “Come here, my little impostors, come here! I haven’t seen
you in a long time!” She gave them some sweets, and then asked
them to sing a certain popular song, a rather lusty pagan one,
commencing:
“Greetings to the girl
With the new sun’s fragrance! . .
When they had finished, all the company laughed and wanted it
repeated. But Francisco said, “Let’s not sing this any more. Our
Lord certainly doesn’t like us to sing such things.” So they declined
and took their leave. Lucia believed that in disappointing her
godfather’s wife she probably lost a good inheritance; “but the
good God had destined me for another heritage much more
precious.”
It was October, 1918, and the war was about to end, as Our
Lady had promised. But the great epidemic of influenza, one of the
concomitant scourges of the almost universal punishment of man’s
apostacy, was laying low millions of persons throughout the world;
and toward the end of October it made its first appearance in
Aljustrel. All of the Abobora family except Lucia were stricken.
In Ti Marto’s house, he alone was left to nurse the rest. Francisco,
the first to be put to bed, had a severe case, ending with
bronchial pneumonia.
It was heartbreaking for his father and mother to see him welcome
the illness as the beginning of the journey that the Lady had
promised him. He became so weak that he could hardly move, yet
he never complained. “If we gave him a little milk,” Olimpia
remembers, “he took the milk. If we gave him an egg, he ate the
egg. Poor little lad! He took the bitter medicines without making
a face. This gave us hope that he would get well. But what do you
think? He was always telling us that it was no use, that Our Lady
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFPyAD0UZuIPScH-hdHaWj0EsebNoqa8AelEcU60XBnHFEY1BKfr0BOCSW7LIzOX6ZpTr_EEP8Wda8q4dQrk-zQ5Qz8z8h-AnxT7k5vlAY2fRZbyO-RPkGdUSMLa0njYZJWHbxm=w491-h810-v0
was coming to take him to heaven.” His only sorrow was that
he was no longer able to make his daily visit to the hidden Jesus in
the church at Fatima.
Jacinta became ill a few days after Francisco. One day Lucia
found her strangely elated. ‘‘Look, Lucia!” she said. “Our Lady
came to see us here, and she said that she is coming very soon to
take Francisco to heaven. And she asked me if I still wanted to
convert more sinners and I said yes.
“Our Lady wants me to go to two hospitals. But not to be cured.
It is to suffer more for the love of God, for the conversion of
sinners and in reparation for the offenses committed against the
Immaculate Heart of Mary.
“She said that you were not going,” she continued, as Lucia,
perhaps, began to look hopeful. “She said my mother is going to
take me, and then I will stay there alone.”
Ti Marto and his wife heard this sort of talk with a chill of
fear. For this was no ordinary sickness, this bronchial influenza.
Every day one heard of some neighbor who had died; every day the
church bell at Fatima announced another sad rendezvous in the
cemetery across the way. In many Portuguese towns that winter
the tolling of funeral bells had to be forbidden, to prevent a state
of panic. But Ti Marto had lived through too many troubles to
allow himself to get hysterical whenever a hearse went by. He had
never doubted that Jacinta had seen Our Lady at Cova da Ina, but
he was not the man to call in the undertaker just because a little
girl had a dream or a vision.
Sure enough, the fever of Francisco began to go down day by
day, his pulse to grow stronger. Toward Christmas he was able to
get up, though pale and weak, and go about a little. At the
beginning of the new year he seemed almost himself again. In
January he went to the cave at Cabego to say the Angel’s prayer.
One day he would pray at Cova da Ina, another at Valinhos. Once,
although his head ached, he walked to Fatima to kneel for quite a
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF_gRWTjMCZfSYg7AOUhFE3-AaDGJIIoWplmaqK2gQvjRZCIWUqO5x4rq6zi2MsstwGUS_xyDhyLDro-KEjRe4hjKmx1oF72k011lvIeq2RaJGyXrXT9dtgj2Ikmf8k2UNS5HER=w491-h810-v0
while before the altar, consoling the hidden Jesus for the world’s
neglect.
When pilgrims came he tried to answer their questions patiently.
This was not always easy. One afternoon he returned rather tired
from Vahnhos to find the house full of people who had spread
rosaries, crucifixes, medals and other objects on a table, and were
waiting for him to bless them. “I can’t bless them, and neither
can you,” he said with some severity. “The priests bless them.”
The visitors departed in haste, shouting insults at him over their
shoulders.
Before the end of January he was ill again, with a low fever.
Ti Marto as usual tried to put a good face on the matter. “Never
mind, Francisco, you are going to get well, just as you did before.
You are going to be a strong man, you will see.”
“No,” replied the boy. “Our Lady is coming very soon now.”
His godmother Teresa was one of those who attempted to make
him take what she considered a more hopeful view. She promised
him a speedy recovery, for she was going to offer his weight in
wheat to give the poor, and Our Lady would never refuse to grant
such a request.
“It’s not worth your trouble,” said the boy calmly. “Our
Lady will not grant you this grace.”
A few days after this he became much worse, and had to return
to his bed. It was that single iron bed still to be seen there, with its
patchwork quilt, its ornate colored metal back, and its two brass
knobs. It filled up the space between three plain walls. Overhead,
toward the right, there was a small window, showing nothing but
a bit of sky. As Francisco laid his hot and aching head on the
pillow, he was convinced that he would never get up again. And
from that time on he became steadily worse.
Jacinta was ill most of this time in another room. She would
listen until she felt sure that both her parents were out of the
house. Then she would slip out of bed and steal into Francisco’s
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGYoJrlnJWJfES-Lu7D9xvc4KLNukRhtBi_hUL5SZ_KwDQsfByc2b0_NeMtYJfFjrDasdPHQrLENlXCATFYvdWp75yKRalslrG3LAgzzjKQW_qfxy8sqBquwO-p5z5y8leCRj6e=w491-h810-v0
[i68 Our Lady of Fatima
room to perch beside him and talk, until this was discovered and
forbidden. Toward evening Lucia would stop in on her way home
from school. Ti Olimpia would smile broadly. She knew what this
meant to the invalids.
Lucia would say, “Well, Jacinta, have you made many sacrifices
today?’’
“Yqs, a lot,” answered the little girl. She lowered her voice.
“My mother was out and I wanted to go many times to visit
Francisco, and I didn’t do it.”
Lucia went to the boy’s room. He was flushed, his eyes much too
large and bright. O D
“Do you suffer much, Francisco?”
“Bastante. But it doesn’t matter. I suffer to console Our Lord, and
in a little while I shall be with Him.”
“When you do go, don’t forget to ask Our Lady to take me there
soon, also.”
“I won’t ask that. You know very well that she doesn’t want
you there yet.”
One afternoon Lucia brought some other girls, schoolmates.
When they had gone, Francisco looked seriously at her and said:
“Don’t walk with them, because you can learn to commit sins.”
“But they leave school when I do.”
“When you leave, spend a little while at the feet of the hidden
Jesus, and then come home alone.” 8
His fever was somewhat higher, and it was plain that he was
growing weaker. One day when Lucia was alone with him, he
took a piece of rope from under the bedclothes and handed it to
her.
“Take it before my mother finds it. I’m not strong enough to hide
it any more.” It was the one they had found on the road and had
made into a sort of hair-shirt.
By the first of April Francisco was so weak that he could hardly
s Memoir IV, p. 20.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEQ79WHXQHHFX8NoZhPUTCd_tFFlzSC6Pm5Qc0sAWCgCak9ONodj2Vg2V3MinX-o7FU2NC9DjhaSqqnL04SbdgjOH8ojr2lQy0hT_74GAZasdZfIXNHqwtPdDVnJKtchRxABLddDg=w491-h810-v0
move his lips in prayer. It grieved him not to be able to say his
Rosary. “I’m not strong enough, Mother,” he said. “When I say
the Hail Marys my head gets all mixed up.”
“Just say it in your heart then.” Olimpia laid an anxious hand
on his brow. “Our Lady hears it just the same and is just as pleased.”
He smiled at her contentedly.
It was spring again, and sometimes the distant sad song of a
nightingale would come floating in through the tiny window on the
sweet air of the Serra. Francisco said he wanted to see Lucia. She
came running over.
“Look, Lucia, I am very sick, and I am going to heaven very
soon.”
Lucia tried to seem casual. “Then look here, don’t forget to pray
much for sinners, for the Holy Father, for me and for Jacinta.”
“Yes,.I will. But look—ask Jacinta these things afterwards. I’m
afraid I’ll forget them when I go to Our Lord. And first I want to
console Him. . . . Look, Lucia I want to go to confession.”
On the night of April 2 he was so much worse that his parents
promised to send to the rectory the first thing in the morning to ask
the Prior to come and hear his confession and give him Viaticum.
In the early dawn Francisco whispered to his sister Teresa that
he wanted to see Lucia at once. The girl ran down to the Abobora
house, woke her cousin, and said:
“Lucia, come quickly! Francisco is very sick and says he wants
to tell you something!”
Lucia dressed hastily and hurried to his bedside. She asked his
mother, his brother John and two of his sisters to leave the room,
since it was some secret that Francisco wanted to tell her. They did
so, and the boy said:
“It is that I am going to confess so that I can receive Commum
ion and then die. I want you to tell me if you have seen me commit
any sin and ask Jacinta if she has seen me commit any.”
Lucia thought hard. “Sometimes you disobeyed your mother—
when she told you to stop staying in the house, and you hid.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHDMrxS3pIe9qbcxS2sq9lrfzNTRBVP1oT_Z7ATTDOe8-eDQTw4yXPjixI-AWZGtDbWgE79chgB55h7Ntdzb7VT9laVVtjijrnwR8cP-wyCA-B1wizIq5X2r3wh40FI9FXUy_nCUw=w491-h810-v0
“It is true. I did that. Now go ask Jacinta if she remembers
anything else.”
Jacinta thought very hard. “Look, tell him that before Our Lady
appeared to us, he stole a tostao 4 from his father to buy the hand-
organ from Jose Marto of Casa Velha, and that when the boys of
Aljustrel threw stones at those of Boleiros he also threw some.”
Lucia hurried back with this message to Francisco. “I’ve already
confessed those,” he murmured. “But I’ll tell them again. Perhaps
it is for these sins that I did that Our Lord is so sad. But even if I
don’t die I will never do them again. I am sorry now.” And
putting his hands together he said, “O my Jesus, pardon us, save us
from the fire of hell, draw all souls to heaven, especially those in
most need!” Then turning to Lucia he added, “Look, you too ask
Our Lord to pardon me my sins.”
“I will, don’t worry. If Our Lord hadn’t forgiven you, Our Lady
wouldn’t have told Jacinta the other day that she was coming soon
to take you to heaven. Now I am going to Mass, and there I will
pray to the hidden Jesus for you.”
“Look—ask Him also that the Senhor Prior may give me Holy
Communion.”
“Why, yes!”
When Lucia returned from Mass, Jacinta had got up and was
sitting on the edge of her brother’s bed. Francisco said at once:
“Did you ask the hidden Jesus to have the Senhor Prior give me
Holy Communion?”
“I did.”
“Afterwards in heaven I will pray for you.”
“Do! Yet the other day you said you would not! ”
“That was to take you to heaven soon. But if you wish I will
pray, and then Our Lady will do as you wish.”
“I do wish. You pray.”
This is what Lucia remembers of the conversation. “I left him
* A small coin worth 100 rets-—about nine cents in U. S. money.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH4Oevfv2bJARLJVWqz8NwZgYQj76rtkRqHZXxv0Vs8g5GRIEghYI_2ENzJ_cTmqcBpRd59WYTv1m4sX6OjsgViZ9Y3ur10YDgm_cMG98MoVwrXRhip_DS_J1ofUADnevz7sSIrIw=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 171
then and went about my daily duties of work and school. When I
returned at nightfall, he was radiant with joy. He had confessed
and the Senhor Prior had promised him to bring Holy Communion
the following day.”
The next morning, April 3, was a lovely one. Francisco lay very
tranquil, waiting for the priest. After a while his eyes opened. He
had heard the tinkling of the little bell that the acolyte was ringing
to let people know that the Senhor Prior had the Sacred Host with
him. He tried to sit up, but he was too weak, and his godmother
Teresa told him he could receive his First Communion just as well
lying down. Meanwhile Olimpia had lighted the holy candles
and had set them on a small table by the bed.
Now the priest was in the room holding the hidden Jesus before
him', and saying three times, “Domine, non sum dignus. . . .”
Franciscp was almost in heaven.
When Jacinta went afterwards to see him—she was allowed to
that day—he told her all about it. “Today I am happier than you,
for I have within my breast the hidden Jesus. I am going to heaven,
but there I will pray a great deal to Our Lord and Our Lady that
they bring you there too, soon.”
Jacinta stayed with him nearly all day, sometimes saying the
Rosary for him when he was unable to say it himself, sometimes
just sitting on the edge of the bed and looking at him. Lucia came
after school as usual. Francisco said to her:
“Certainly in heaven I am going to pray hard for your wishes—
who knows but Our Lady may take you also very soon?”
Lucia had changed her mind. “Don’t do that, no. Just imagine
yourself at the feet of Our Lord and Our Lady who are so
good.”
“All right.” Then a terrible thought came to him. “But perhaps
she won’t remember me!”
“Perhaps she won’t remember you! ! ! Patience!”
Francisco smiled.
He looked so ethereal that Lucia doubted whether she would see
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFZh4ghewF5Mb2g4535XrKDikdEZDeKAhznpbDRFXMRN800VqqKJZZZmEKgiuijSBcno6h9otEB4bPCDi_pUAzESqBajG8Dxrx8iTsBL4kwHu7KRmxW36jr5YcgQfFdSzYLUtcj=w491-h810-v0
172 Our Lady of Fatima
him again. “Goodby, Francisco,” she said softly. “If you go to
heaven tonight, don’t forget me there, do you hear?”
“I won’t forget you, no. Don’t worry.”
He seized her right hand with unexpected strength and pressed it
hard for a long moment, looking deeply into her eyes; and both
were blinded by tears. “Do you want anything else?” It sounded
stupid, but it was all she could think of.
“No,” he replied in a low voice.
Ti Olimpia came in to send Lucia home. “Then goodby,
Francisco, till heaven. Goodby till heaven.” Lucia was still weeping
as she went out. She could stand no more.
All night the boy lay quietly thinking of the hidden Jesus he
had received and would soon see face to face. He was thirsty, but
was unable to drink the milk his mother offered; he could take only
a few drops of water. “I’m all right,” he would say, “don’t give me
anything.”
Once he called her and said, “Look, mother, what a pretty light
there, near the door! . . .
“Now I don’t see it any more.”
In the morning he asked her blessing and pardon for any trouble
he had caused her in his life. At ten o’clock his life passed almost
imperceptibly. There was still a faint smile on his lips when
Jacmta and Lucia came to look at him.
The next day, April 5, 1919, some men in green capes, members
of the Misencordia, went slowly up the cobbled road to Fatima
with an acolyte carrying a crucifix. Four boys in white walked
after them with a small coffin. Ti Marto and Olimpia followed,
and a few others. They laid the remains of Francisco in a small
grave near the cemetery gate. All said the Rosary.
Jacinta was too ill to be there. Lucia went up afterwards alone
and placed a little cross on the grave.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGwUtkN94WIwk3UeQkphIBFMLxDinVFhvjRYkZvzw7AM7fAAlFmYPZaPZvKF5B52NnnWaNZHy3wg8tr7a3e0xYcaRdxptyuxMbhEFGk2u9XtOUHNAZ-cEq82gd_uD4gVlQNuTuZkw=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER XVI
Jacinta was moved into the bed where Francisco had died. It was
nearer the front door, and she could see and hear people better.
Perhaps Olimpia thought this would help her get over her grief.
For although Jacinta knew where Francisco was and who had taken
him, she missed him terribly.
The person who helped her most in those gloomy spring days was
Lucia. Every day she would stop in, cheerful and matter-of-fact, on
her way home from school. On holidays or Sundays she would
bring flowers from the Serra, and as she arranged them on the table,
would tell Jacinta where she had found them. “These arc from Cova
da Iria. I found this at Vahnhos. This grew by the Lagoa.” The
best were from the slope of Cabe^o—violets, wild roses, peonies
and daisies in turn, all the flowers that the little girl would have
picked if she had been well.
Lucia brought diverting accounts of the chapel that some of
the devout were building near the azinheira at Cova da Iria.
Everybody wanted to give orders, and no one wanted to take
them; hence there were some warm and amusing arguments,
in which we may be sure Maria Carreira put in her two cents’
worth when the mustard of zealous resentment stuck in her sharp
nose. No priest was there to arbitrate, and it took some time to
find one who would bless the hermitage.1
Jacinta was amused, then pensive:
“I will never see Cova da Iria or Vahnhos again,” she said.
“Yes, you will, Jacinta. Courage!”
“No. Our Lady told me that my mother would take me to a
hospital in a dark building and that I would not get well.”
1 Maria Carreira, in De Marchi, p. 205.
*73
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGA5nH064Xb6WeRBzfwFG8MzOQ-y_EDqwbbbIl1_LjJnwRwdSGeS9wv4mqLkwYfnlfs7KHZcGlEUwiYhaZpkX4skO0f_5sBG0OTg5wjaBACfHGQVKrsZ30lm6qv75F_z_nUNp-ymQ=w491-h810-v0
174 Our Lady of Fatima
It was true that pleurisy took a long time to heal. Yet it seemed
that sick people could help others even while they lay helpless
themselves. There was Lucia’s Aunt Victoria, for instance, whose
brilliant but erratic son was missing for weeks, until Jacinta began
asking Our Lady to send him home. Then after a few days he
suddenly returned, with a strange story suggesting something
like bilocation on the part of the young invalid. Having spent
all his money, he had resorted to theft, had been arrested, and
had been thrown into jail at Torres Novas. One night he managed
to escape. He fled to the mountains and hid himself in a pine
forest. Frightened during a violent thunderstorm, he fell on his
knees in the rain and asked God’s forgiveness and a safe return
home. Presently a little girl came out of the darkness and took
him by the hand, and he saw that it was Jacinta. She led him
down the mountain to the road that runs from Alqueidao to
Reguengo; then, making a sign that he should continue that way,
she vanished. At dawn he came to a bridge that he recognized
as being near Boleiros, not far from his home in Fatima. When
Lucia questioned Jacinta, the child could never explain, but said
she had prayed a great deal for the young man.2
When the warm weather brought no improvement in Jacinta’s
condition, the doctor said she would never recover unless she went
to a hospital for an operation, for she had purulent pleurisy as a
result of the bronchial pneumonia; and one morning in July
(1919) Ti Marto placed her on the back of a burro and took her
to Ourem. The hospital there was a large white, rather cheerful
building, and the ward where Jacinta was put to bed was bright
and airy. This could hardly be the dark place where Our Lady
had said her mother would take her.
Olimpia went to see her there, however, and found her cheerful
and uncomplaining, even when some delicacies that a visitor had
brought had vanished from the top drawer of the medicine cabinet.
2 Memoir IV, p. 45.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF4nCEoEOjPcCRa3GoDUEcd1CT1dOu1ZcuDrR4_kRRleCwMN7oJavxAJp6rVDhfMoQzGfDGThau91RIGdiFQrLjlTUVTbhtusphZqp2OMq5nNm_4uEgMT2ig_cgTzzle9eB47UB=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 175
“It was that glutton of a nurse,” said Olimpia. But Jacinta did
not care.
Lucia visited her only once. That was the summer when her
father died (July 31, 1919); she records the event briefly in her
memoirs without comment or emotion. Yet it seems likely enough
that all his family missed Antonio, for if he was not the best
husband and father in the world, he was not the worst, and it
was only “when he had a drop on him,” as Maria Carreira observed,
that he was inclined to be ill-tempered. Certainly Maria Rosa
grieved for him, and her health rapidly failed after his death.
She began to have alarming attacks of weakness and shortness
of breath which the physician attributed to her old heart ailment.
After one of these seizures Maria of the Angels said to her
youngest sister, “Look here, Lucia, you haven’t any father now,
and if your mother dies you will be an orphan. If it is true that
you saw Our Lady, ask her to cure your mother.”
The child arose without a word, went to her room, put on a
heavy woolen dress, for it was cold and rainy, and went to Cova
da Iria, to prostrate herself in the mud before the azinheira. When
she returned after a few hours, she brought a handful of red
earth, and told Gloria to make a tea of it. She had promised Our
Lady, she said, that if her mother was cured they would all go
on their knees from the highway to the place of the apparitions
for nine days in succession, and give food to nine poor girls. It
is Maria of the Angels who tells this curious story to Father De
Marchi:3
“Gloria prepared the tea and I gave it to mother.
“ ‘What tea is this?’ she asked.
“ ‘It is of violet blossoms,’ we said. And she drank all of it.”
There were no more heart attacks, though certain other infirmi¬
ties continued; and faithful to Lucia’s promise, she and all her
sisters went to Cova da Iria for nine evenings after supper, painfully
8 Op. cit., p. 218.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE7VleTIUr5Bco1ba_y94GAOw6GJ0NjWqzBJNkpEuUsOLR3_lZ7hG8vXAacr9sm9o93JO-uDZ_QAU53gyIUIx4zlyKJ7pOIWEC0Qu3HTO7xkBX1ERZpkCdtwTSEw78fHAY61ZnRTA=w491-h810-v0
.176 Our Lady of Fatima
hobbling down the stony slope on their knees while Maria Rosa
followed on foot, giving thanks to God.
Lucia was unable to obtain any such favor for her little friend
in the hospital at Ourem. An incision had been made and a drain
inserted; yet after two months Jacinta was no better—-in fact
she was worse than ever. It was costing Ti Marto 1,200 reis, or
about $1.35 every day, and he had spent ail he could afford. At
the end of August he hitched up the burrita again, and brought
the invalid home.
Ai, Jesus! Olimpia hardly knew her child, she was so thin, pale,
transparent, emaciated. There was a great open wound in her chest
that had to be dressed every day. Dr. Formigao, who saw her in
October, described her as a living skeleton, her arms nothing but
bones, her face all eyes, her cheeks wasted by fever.
The good theologian was one of the 600 persons who went
to Fatima on the thirteenth of October that year, to celebrate the
second anniversary of the great miracle. That was the day when
the pilgrims were startled by twenty-one terrific explosions, one
after another, near the azinheira. But it was not an attack by the
enemy, as many feared. It was only a workman from Porto-de-
Mos who had fired a salvo of twenty-one bombs in honor of Our
Lady, to show her his gratitude for a favor unexpectedly granted
him.
There was no doubt that the peasants had taken the Fatima
devotion to their hearts. One small indication of this was the
growth of the fund of small coins left by the tree. By the summer
of 1918 the total was 357,000 reis or about $500. This continued
to be a torment to Maria Carreira, the unofficial custodian of
the shrine by common consent, all the more so when people began
to malign her, insinuating that she was feathering her own nest.
In vain she tried to get the Prior to accept the money, and in
vain he wrote the Patriarchate for instructions. At one time the
Administrator of Ourem summoned Maria’s husband to Ourem
to give an accounting. After the death of Antonio, Maria Rosa
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEdPSLrrwBNxCTEke5sSrcjhw6uYR1YFU3Lu0u3OCZEoMUUBEvHFiLBvLoc_GHEibLlc0a2WgkbszWKqLO60AILSHUgD4FOFHzEOBhu_p7FnGYJnMytb_rUFehcdfQy6Yv1Helj3Q=w491-h810-v0
sent her sons, as owners of the land at Cova da Iria, to demand that
Maria da Capelhina turn the fund over to a commission. Fortu¬
nately an appeal for arbitration was made to the Vicar of Olival,
Father Faustino Ferreira, who arranged a friendly agreement until
the money could be delivered to some diocesan authority. After
that Maria Rosa and Maria Carreira became bosom friends.
Another happy result was that Lucia found in the Vicar of Olival
a loyal friend and wise director.
It seemed to a few thoughtful men like him that the devotion
at Cova da Iria was already bringing blessings upon Portugal and
on the world. Not only had the war ended, but diplomatic rela¬
tions between Lisboa and the Holy See had been resumed in
July, 1918. And in December, 1919, Pope Benedict XV appealed
to all Portuguese Catholics to submit to the Republic as the
lawfully constituted authority, and to accept offices if they were
offered; while the beatification of Nuno Alvares, the victor of
Albujarrota, contributed much to the growth of good feeling.
Nevertheless the Government continued to persecute the Church
in many ways; and it never relented in its efforts to stamp out
the devotion at Fatima. Perhaps this partly explains why His
Eminence, Cardinal Mendes Belo, Patriarch of Lisboa, threatened
to excommunicate any priest who spoke in favor of the apparitions.
A strong and able man, he was inclined to think in terms of power,
of public opinion, of prudent expediency. Lie may have felt that
when relations between Church and State were improving, it
would be unwise to allow a new and untested devotion to dis¬
turb them.
Under these circumstances it took courage for Dr. Formigao
to befriend Jacinta. Unfortunately he was able to do no more at
this time than suggest that she ought to he sent to some really
good sanitarium. Neither he nor Ti Marto had the means of
accomplishing this, and he returned to Santarem feeling unhappy
and helpless.
During the warm days of autumn, however, Jacinta began to
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFSrpTyYsKvSu2p1yckk_qANQx6sCWdE1aNciNZV-haJKXXJ8A5X0fYloj28YVCgo_X1_8UHCNvxtYiWSb7nvO_dciT-7LfltQRxif75ESvofRfMAkNh5etqCv0xRnARCU3bHlyAA=w491-h810-v0
178 Our Lady of Fatima
improve. She was able to leave her bed, then to go outdoors, and
finally to attend Mass at Fatima on Sunday. Once or twice she
went as far as Cova da Iria. When her parents learned of this
they put a stop to it, and none too soon. For with the first blast of
cold weather she became feverish again, and had to go back to
bed. This troubled her little so long as she was able to get up
and say her Rosary, kneeling in contemplation with her head
on the floor, as the Angel had done. But it gradually became
more difficult.
“When I am alone I get out of bed to say the prayers of the
Angel,” she confided to Lucia. “But now I can’t put my head on
the floor any more, because I fall. So I pray only on my knees.”
When Father Faustino Ferreira heard this from Lucia, he told
Jacinta that she must say all her prayers lying down in bed.
“And Our Lord will be content?” she asked anxiously.
“Yes, Our Lord wants yoil to do what the Vicar orders.”
“All right. I won’t get up any more.”
Even in bed Jacinta continued to do penance for some of those
hale and hearty sinners whom she had never seen. When thirsty
she would go without a drink. She would refuse some grapes for
which her mouth watered. Or she would lie awake wanting to
get up and pray, and offering up the desire as a penance rather
than disobey her mother; and this conflict would keep her awake
all night. It was only to Lucia that she revealed what a terrible
pain she had in her chest. But it was to honor the Immaculate
Heart of Mary.
“Tell all the people that God gives them graces through her,”
she said. “If I could only put in the heart of everybody that light
that I have here in my breast to burn me and make me love the
heart of Jesus and the heart of Mary so much! ... I don’t
know how it is, I feel Our Lord inside of me, I understand what
He says, and I don’t see or hear Him! But it is so good to be
with Him. . . . Look, do you know what? Our Lord is sad
because Our Lady told us not to offend Him any more because
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFZLa0Gxw6q039IX2uvfUMf0Rp5NzBxZLBSIoS93a1zw4K3Xt9eAg8F8g-80I100IXNjKsrhevp75ymtlhdB5oySlvr5bnYh1xjk_cBgMEVdkkjavWdo1N-sbKftTGY-PLsn3WJlg=w491-h810-v0
i?9 Our Lady of Fatima
He is much offended, and nobody pays any attention. They keep
right on doing the same sins.”
When Lucia came after Mass, Jacinta would say, “Did you
receive?”
“Yes.”
“Come over here near me, because you have in your heart the
hidden Jesus. Oh, I wish I could go to Communion!”
Yet three times during the year Jacinta saw her “little Mother
of Heaven” standing by her bed, encouraging her. The last of
these visions was late in December, 1919.
“Our Lady came to see me last night,” she reported joyfully.
“She told me that I am going to Lisboa, to another hospital. She
said that after I suffer a great deal I will die. I will die all alone.
But she told me not to be afraid, for she will come and find me
and take me to heaven.”
A little later, as certain implications became clear, Jacinta began
to cry, her bony hand clinging to her friend’s arm. “I’ll never see
you again, Lucia!”
“I’ll come to see you in the hospital.”
“No, you won’t come to see me. Look, pray for me, a lot, for
I die alone.”
One day when Lucia brought her a stamp with an image of
the Mother of Sorrows on it, she looked at it thoughtfully a
moment, and then cried, in anguish:
“Oh, my little Mother of Heaven, do I really have to die
alone?”
There was something heartbreaking in this, suggesting the awful
cry in the Garden, “Father, if it be possible . . .” Lucia too was
weeping as she clasped her in her arms and groped for words of
consolation.
“What do you care if you die alone, Jacinta, if Our Lady is
coming to take you?”
“It’s true, I don’t care. But I don’t know how it is, sometimes
I forget that she is coming to take me.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF3J9pHL9xDTTI8oX22P4ryoBKxcMVED9fs3A4uK0h_xyQptju6okbWZfOTOQOb83mCT7NbibRVDnrEZYh0T-Y5DbjdrJId2hnEaMMxWGBs16sAh-4ryZyfaFNT8Tky4xaOPKjYqw=w491-h810-v0
,180 Our Lady of Fatima
Olimpia had to get most of her information about her child’s
inner life from Lucia. “What did Jacinta say to you today?’’
she would whisper at the door. “Ask Jacinta what she is thinking
of when she has her hands over her face so long without moving.
I asked her, but she smiled and did not answer.”
When Lucia put the question, Jacinta replied, “I am thinking
of Our Lord and Our Lady and of (here she whispered part of
the secret). I like to think of them.”
This was little satisfaction to Olimpia, since the secret remained
untold. “The life of these girls is an enigma,” she complained
to Maria Rosa.
“It certainly is,” agreed Lucia’s mother tartly. “When they are
alone they talk in a corner and nobody can catch a word of what
they say, no matter how much they listen, and then when anyone
comes, they lower their heads and don’t say a word. I can’t under¬
stand this mystery.”
No one but Lucia took Jacinta’s talk about a hospital in Lisboa
seriously. Peasants could seldom afford hospitals, and Lisboa was
ninety miles away. It sounded like a delirious dream until one
day in January, 1920, when they saw an automobile stop in front
of the Marto cottage. The visitor was Dr. Formigao, and he had
with him a lady and gentleman whom he had interested in
Jacinta’s case, and who had come all the way from Lisboa to see
her—Dr. Enrico Lisboa, a noted specialist in ophthalmology, and
his wife. A brief examination convinced Dr. Lisboa that the child
would soon die if she were not sent to a good hospital. With his
connections in the capital he could easily arrange this. He and
some of his friends, including the Baron of Alvaiazere, would
take care of all the expenses.
Ti Marto and his wife objected that their daughter had been
worse after one hospital treatment, and that in any case it was
useless to attempt to prolong her life if Our Lady, as they believed,
had promised to come for her soon.
“The will of Our Lady,” replied the physician gravely, “is
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEtwDY80YmI6HPVF7JwFHTZimPuCZV20E-cwYtmJOg07RKzPFZwtKJ_8NS77OpAGNeO5kxQynq2OVJBu4QgOvpzEEUBo5SvVahWxicO_lBBW8jaOaejeKgYOe3wzryPXfML2t5S5Q=w491-h810-v0
superior to all human considerations. But the only way to make
sure that Our Lady does in fact wish to take her is to exhaust all
scientific means of preserving her life.”
It was decided, then, that Ti Olimpia should take her to Lisboa
as soon as the necessary arrangements could be made. Jacinta was
not surprised. She had been expecting something like this. And
for some reason she became notably better as the time for her
departure drew near. One fine January day, her mother and a
neighbor took her on the back of a burrita to Cova da Iria for a
farewell visit. At the Lagoa she asked to get down, and they all
said the Rosary. Then she picked some wild flowers, which she
carried to the place of the apparitions and laid in the little chapel
as an offering to Our Lady. She knelt by the azinheira to say a
last prayer. When the two women helped her to her feet again,
she looked about at the sky and the moor, and remarked:
“Mother, when Our Lady went away she passed over those
trees, and then she entered heaven so quickly that I thought they
must have pinched her feet in the door.” 4
Next morning she said goodby to her father and to her best
friend. “It cut me to the heart,” wrote Lucia. “I held her a long
time in my arms. She said to me, crying, ‘We shall never meet
again. Pray for me a lot till I go to heaven, and afterwards I’ll
pray a lot for you. Never tell anybody the secret even if they
kill you. Love Jesus and the Immaculate Heart of Mary a great
deal and make many sacrifices for sinners.’ ”
“Goodby, Jacinta.”
“Goodby, Lucia.”
Olimpia and her oldest son Antonio took Jacinta to Chao de
Magas, where they boarded a train for Lisboa, arriving four or
five hours later at the noisy and dusty station called Rossio. None
of them had ever been in the big city before. Olimpia carried a
4 Olimpia told this to Father De Marchi, op. cit., p. 244.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGbFJ7qt8ZwpdFUGPxjdPehWE8_D8kW6iC-1pOahPwhPjIFdjtbBd0xB455UistPMu9zP1j5D9o6_tUs079tHlK4WzZiZVPP7CGhYUOubmwmGoDkmA0Ikz38h3wVdH2PCnfIQtr1w=w491-h810-v0
white handkerchief in her right hand, which she fluttered from
time to time, and Jacinta had one in her left hand. These were
the signals agreed upon so that certain ladies, friends of the Baron
of Alvaiazere, might recognize them. But no ladies appeared.
Antonio, who could read, went to make some inquiries. When
he failed to return, his mother feared he was lost, and went about
the station crying, “Antonio! Antonio!”
After what seemed an interminable time Antonio sauntered
back. A moment later three well-dressed ladies introduced them¬
selves as the friends of the Baron.
The first thing to be 'done was to find lodgings for the way¬
farers, for none of the ladies had room for them at home. So they
all went about the city, applying at various houses where there
might be accommodations. Olimpia was tired, Jacinta almost dead
when, after many refusals, a good woman agreed to take them
in. They remained with her for a week.
At the end of that time a place had been found for Jacinta in
the Asilo in the Rua da Estrela, next to the Church of Our Lady
of Miracles. Dona Maria da Punficacao Godinho, the head of
this institution, was a Franciscan nun who went about dressed as
a laywoman—since religious garb was forbidden under the Repub¬
lic-collecting alms with which she managed to house, clothe,
feed and educate from twenty to twenty-five orphan girls. She
had a particular devotion to Our Lady, and having heard of her
appearances at Fatima, was praying to be allowed to go there
and see the children so favored, when someone interrupted to tell
her that Jacinta was in Lisboa. From that moment she took the
child to her motherly heart, made her at home in the orphanage,
and had her sit every day in a sunny window looking out on the
Garden of the Estrela, where there was always something interesting
to see.
Jacinta was happy. She liked living in a convent. It seemed
heavenly to think that the hidden Lord was there all the time, and
that she could visit Him every day and receive Him at Mass
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGKaS_F-ucBrc4QYnXVrqQbCpXuVptVl2kXzFThqdkO5iIm8wkLPCjqKWgKd_k9sY6ZKkOhewRaPM7T3ZjpVuXT4UC8PHzeNNCXKcF4ajlcXB4QnDUepX8lTTydUIUdE5CC6RLJhg=w491-h810-v0
every morning. She could never understand how visitors could
laugh and gossip in the chapel, and she asked Mother Godinho to
remind them to have more respect for the One Who was there.
When the reproof had little effect, she said positively, “Then
the Cardinal will have to be told about it. Our Lady doesn’t want
people to talk in the church.”
Mother Godinho believed that she had a saint under her roof.
“She speaks with such authority!” she said. She noticed that
Jacinta had little to do with the other girls, except now and then
to give one of them some motherly advice on truthfulness or
obedience. Often the nun would sit with her by the window and
draw her into conversation. Afterwards she would write down
some of the more striking things she said.
“Wars,” remarked Jacinta, “are nothing but punishments for
the sins of the world.
“Our Lady can no longer hold up the arm of her beloved Son
over the world. It is necessary to do penance. If people reform,
Our Lord will save the world. But if they do not reform, He is
going to punish it.
“Our Lord is profoundly indignant with the sins and crimes
that are committed in Portugal. For this, a terrible cataclysm of
the social order threatens our country and principally the city of
Lisboa. There will break loose there, as it appears, a civil war of
anarchist or communist character, accompanied by sacks, assassina¬
tions, fires and devastations of all kinds. The capital will be
converted into a veritable image of hell. On the occasion when
the outraged divine justice inflicts so frightful a punishment, all
who can should flee from this city. This punishment now predicted
should be announced little by little and with due discretion.5
“Dear little Our Lady! At! I am so sorry for Our Lady! She
is so sad.
“Pray much, my little mother, for sinners. Pray much for priests.
5 This obviously is the diction of Mother Godinho, though the substance no
doubt was Jacinta’s.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFl7YQuzIniz94QHoGuz4CeG87xjCqIdXNkyVYWXf7g3gQ4g4vPIVIUHYoapx5SXVjZ4qtKXpBsMrjljOUcuTi0s4kYAGAc3gOzQvdU3zFEty_W31bd5xhuOPndsOZ2YSJ9O_FsMA=w491-h810-v0
Pray much for religious. Priests should occupy themselves with
the affairs of the Church. Priests should be pure, very pure. The
disobedience of priests and religious to their superiors and to the
Holy Father offends Our Lord very greatly.
“My little mother, pray for those who govern. Alas for those
who persecute the religion of Our Lord! If the Government leaves
the Church in peace and gives liberty to the holy Faith, it will
be blessed by God.
“My little mother, do not walk in the midst of luxury. Flee
from riches. Be very friendly to holy poverty and to silence. Have
great charity even for the wicked. Speak ill of no one and flee
from those who do. Be very patient, for patience carries us to
heaven. Mortification and sacrifices please Our Lord a great deal.
“Confession is a sacrament of mercy. For this reason it is neces¬
sary to approach the confessional with confidence and joy. Without
confession there is no salvation.
“The Mother of God wants more virgin souls, which bind
themselves to her by the vow of chastity.
“I should like to go into the convent. But I should like much
more to go to heaven.
“To be a religious it is necessary to be very pure in soul and
body.”
Here Mother Godinho asked, “And do you know what it means
to be pure?”
“I do. I do. To be pure in body is to keep chastity. To be
pure in soul is not to commit sins, not to look at what one should
not see, not to steal, never to lie, always to tell the truth whatever
it costs us.
“Those who do not keep the promises they make to Our Lady
will never be happy in their affairs.
“Doctors don’t have light to cure the sick because they don’t
have love of God.”
“Who taught you all these things?” asked Mother Godinho.
“It was Our Lady. But some I think of myself. I like very much
to think.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEoLrTg4bav3NGEYzumVr99JcTwcukIw8LS34RERdRDHpQAvuanivYL8aFIj3O3o4hPAiBVOeihGu2MTzpsrChkna4iA7wX0_MF7WFvu2M16nGaHtV7Iq7qHMObgHKPKKZmWDWCBA=w491-h810-v0
Jacinta’s mother visited her more than once at the Asilo before
returning to Aljustrel. Mother Godinho made her feel at home,
and drew her out, with a woman’s curiosity, about each member
of her family. She was particularly interested in Teresa, who was
then fifteen, and in Florinda, who was sixteen. “Wouldn’t you
be pleased if they had religious vocations?” she asked.
“God deliver me!” exclaimed Olimpia.
Jacinta did not hear this conversation. But afterwards she said
to Mother Godinho, “Our Lady wants my sisters to be nuns.
My mother doesn’t want them to be, but for this Our Lady will
take them to heaven before long.”
It was on Mother Godinho’s feast day, February 2 (feast of
the Purification of Our Lady, 1920) that she took Jacinta to the
Hospital of Dona Stefania. It was a rather dark and depressing
place, and one of the child’s first disappointments, after she had
been placed in Bed 38 of the children’s ward on the ground floor,
was that there was no chapel, no home for the hidden Jesus. Then
there was a long and careful examination by Dr. Castro Freire,
the chief surgeon, a noted pediatrician. And his conclusion, after
confirming the diagnosis of purulent pleurisy, was that an opera¬
tion must be performed as soon as she got a little stronger.
“It won’t do any good,” said Jacinta. “Our Lady came to tell
me that I am going to die soon.”
One day she looked up and saw her father standing in the
doorway. He had come all the way from Aljustrel to see her; but
he had to hurry back in a few hours, because some of his other
children were sick, and Olimpia needed his help. Perhaps it was
by him that Jacinta sent word to Lucia that Our Lady had visited
her again, and had told her the day and hour of her death.
She had many conversations in the hospital with Mother
Godinho, who came every day. Once the madrinha mentioned a
certain priest who had delivered a wonderful sermon, and was
much praised by fashionable ladies for his theatrical voice and
manner. “When you least expect it,” said Jacinta, “you will
see that that padre is wicked.” Within a few months the great
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFOihjgkQM9nh1DRtXPsk6szFsoxJgvL5lopSh_AZ9YOkqQbzodn6py11ZBfqppIDMBBlDDq7C6YeyKsHi86pOik9LugOIbpBbdXFkz5RrZmlu4Te6HkN0SApYwu70msow7Wa8u1g=w491-h810-v0
preacher left the priesthood under scandalous circumstances. This
was only one of Jacinta’s prophecies that came true. A doctor who
asked her to pray for him when she went to heaven was surprised
to hear her say that he and his daughter were going to die shortly
after she did; and they did. To Mother Godinho, who wanted
to visit Cova da Ina, she said, “You will go—but after my death;
and so will I.”
When Jacinta was taken to the operating room on February io
sh,e was so weak that local anaesthesia had to be given instead of
chloroform or ether. She wept when she saw her body unclothed
and in the hands of men. Dr. Castro Freire then proceeded to
remove two of her ribs on the left side, leaving an opening large
enough to contain his fist. The pain was terrible. “Ai, Nossa
Senhora!” moaned the child. “Ai, Nossa Senhora!” Then she
would murmur, “Patience! We ought to suffer everything to go
to heaven. ... It is for your love, my Jesus! . . . Now you can
convert many sinners, for I suffer much.” At last it was over, and
they took her back to the ward, this time to Bed 60. Doctor
Freire and his assistant felt that the operation had been successful.
Jacinta knew better. For six days she continued to have excruciat¬
ing pains. Then on the night of February 16 she told Mother
Godinho that she had seen Our Lady. “She told me she was
coming for me very soon, and would take away my pains.”
From then on she had no more pain. But she felt certain that
the hour of her going was almost at hand. She sent urgently for
Doctor Lisboa to tell him some secret, probably about himself.
He was busy, and supposed there would be time to see her later.
But at six o’clock on the evening of Friday, February 20, she
called her nurse, Aurora Gomez (“my little Aurora”) and told
her she was about to die and wanted the last sacraments. Two
hours later she made her confession to Father Pereira dos Reis
of the Church of the Holy Angels, who promised to bring her
.Communion next morning.
Jacinta was not there the next morning. At ten-thirty that eve-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF6mBIAMcvdkuBnjSpnp0sRTAuNONj3StuFPDO8bu4RXfF4fDKrJvxE4hZgOe2uY4ud_gogRNidK2jDgfOT3zH_3azEXuJGWCT02sDehYd9LrsEkc7lclYkwlLO66GnxypAWfznwQ=w491-h810-v0
ning the nurse left her for a few moments, and returned just in
time to see her breathe her last sigh, a rosy flush on her cheeks,
a half smile on her lips. Perhaps the nurse’s name was symbolic.
It was night in the dingy hospital, but it was forever dawn in
the soul of Jacinta as the Mother of God bent over Bed 60 and
gathered her into the arms that had enfolded the Christ in infancy
and in death.
The news quickly got about, and some Catholics who believed
in the Fatima apparitions raised money to pay the funeral expenses,
the burial to be on Sunday, February 22, in one of the cemeteries
of Lisboa. The Marquesa of Rio Maior had the body arrayed in
a white Communion dress, while the Marquesa of Lavradio added
a blue cape; and thus, wearing the colors of Our Lady, it was laid
in a white coffin and taken to the Church of the Holy Angels,
where it was placed across two small benches in the sacristy.
In giving permission for this, Father Pereira dos Reis, the pastor
of the church, had had no idea how many people in Lisboa had
heard of Jacinta, and believed in the Fatima revelations. Neverthe¬
less he received the first visitors with patience and kindness. It
was only when more and more kept coming that he became
uneasy. He asked them not to touch rosaries, crucifixes or images
to the body. When some of them refused to obey, he drove them
out of the sacristy. They had not expected this, for he had the
reputation of being a charitable and courteous priest; and there
was a great deal of talk and resentment. Yet the Fatima devotion
had not been approved or authorized, and the Church does not
permit public honors to the dead until their sanctity has been
recognized in some official way after careful investigation. Natu-
ally, too, the Paroco did not wish to offend the Cardinal Patriarch.
And the sanitation authorities might perhaps raise some objection,
as in fact they did. To free himself from further responsibility,
Father Pereira had the body removed to the Casa do Despacho of
the brotherhood of the Most Blessed Sacrament, outside the sacristy,
locked the door, and turned the key over to Senhor Antonio Rebclo
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGGHYfPnUDpiWdeLnJLqFZ3vYvwPJyGevK-Y5VS1DZ1_0nzRjFjx_B7_FcNXEtvrkk0455fEg403mwbWCoMOy2adhT-_qZjZQfnep_EulKjAmmvVl2znOQ5NgMIYCpZg_RBDmGzHg=w491-h810-v0
de Almeida, an undertaker of the Rua da Escola Pohtecmca, in
one of the old and tawdry quarters of the city.
Meanwhile plans for the burial in Lisboa had been given up
when word came from the Baron de Alvaiazere, offering a grave
in his plot in the cemetery of Ourem. On February 23 the under¬
taker allowed a few persons to see the remains before he inclosed
them in a lead casket. All remarked an agreeable odor like that
of flowers, and some insisted that the cheeks still had a faint
roseate flush, giving an impression of life and health. Next morning
the casket was sealed, taken to the Rossio and placed on a train
for Chao de Magas, thence to be driven to Ourem.
On that day there was a large annual assembly of the Saint
Vincent de Paul Society in Lisboa. Many charitable rich men
attended, for one must do something for the poor; and the Cardinal
Patriarch, Dom Antonio Mendes Belo—a man with a strong
purposeful face, that bore a striking resemblance to that of the
actor George Arliss, though perhaps there was a little more rigor
in it—presided. The chairman read a message from Dr. Lisboa,
regretting his inability to be present, for he was busy with another
work of charity concerning one of the children of the Fatima
apparitions. The whole assembly, including His Eminence, burst
into a loud and raucous laugh. This quickly got about the city,
and gave no slight offense to devotees of Our Lady of Fatima.
In anti-clerical circles, on the other hand, it was whispered that
both the Marto children had been murdered by Catholics to avoid
unpleasant contradictions in their stones, and to leave only the
affirmations of Lucia as the official version.
Jacinta was far beyond the reach of cold hearts and lying tongues
in the cemetery at Ourem. A few persons went from Aljustrel to
attend the simple funeral. Tt Marto was one of them, saying
over and over:
“And you died there alone! You died there alone!”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFcxLj3Ft7pi9bZRMJ5gGfY55pEkT-AcdkVNOyJEoYKGm1wjelWjeCRLLmVvmIHRoPZ6OqkCJhdeQ74zLbuAdLn5E-5qYuz_0m9coyL7WUr-BQs9_7XWvHxvocdmF-6l3Yfy8nthQ=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER XVII
Wherever Lucia walked, a dark silhouette between the moors
and the sky, something reminded her of Jacinta or of Francisco.
Every sheep, every star that twinkled into the night, every sun¬
rise and sunset told her again that they would never return. The
wind at Cabe^o brought a dear imaginary voice saying, “I will
never see you again, Lucia. ... I am going to heaven, but you
stay here—alone.” The vagrant scent of rosemary or of wild mint
had power to conjure up an invisible little girl who bent over
her saying, “I do as the angels do, I give you flowers.” On top
of every wall there sat a pensive boy playing softly on his pifa.ro
as he watched the red glare of the dying day on the water of the
Lagoa.
Her mother and sisters tried in many ways to make amends
for their former lack of understanding and sympathy. Maria Rosa
could always be counted upon to do her duty when she saw it.
Her eldest daughter, Mana dos Anjos, had a warm and affectionate
nature; her fine, spiritual and motherly face is evidence that she
could never have done wilful injury to anyone. Yet the very fact
that the apparitions and miracles had now been verified was a
new barrier between Lucia and the other members of her family.
If a prophet is without honor in his own country, neither is a
mystic ever completely at home in his own household. There was
bound to be an unbridgeable gulf between a girl who had spoken
with the Mother of God and had been charged by her with a
mission on which the future of mankind depended, and older
sisters, however lovable and admirable, who were devoted to
dancing, gaiety, husbands and children. A girl with Lucia’s past
was doomed to loneliness in a human sense, no matter where
she might wander in a world whose criteria were no longer hers.
189
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEy0laVwpIRB2VTJuDW9dXZ3oFDQUU4Cd-7m3gl_phwhquUqkktW94OhHjLFcHhM40x-jvBo343kI88TysNOH7EaJSomNxud7A1RgWUfroumh94vGH7W4McKN6AoXsz96BrfWwH=w491-h810-v0
Thus even on that memorable day when her Aunt Olimpia took
her to Ourem to visit the grave of Jacinta, her grief was her
own and incommunicable, having overtones of hope and joy which
the older woman could never have understood. Older? There is
something eternally childlike in Olimpia even in her seventies.
Her privileged niece, at thirteen, had the grave patience of one
who knows what lies behind earthly appearances.
It made her lot no easier to realize that she was now the center
of all the interest, favorable or unfavorable, that the extraordinary
events at Fatima had evoked. She alone could answer the con¬
tinual bombardment of questions and objections; and the only
persons in whom she could fully confide were beyond her reach.
Hers was no small responsibility before God and men. She had
been given a part in something more than an ephemeral rustic
drama. This was obvious from the revelations themselves. Little
Jacinta had seen it, Francisco had known it.
It was implicit in some of the scenes that took place on the
Serra. Men like her brother Antonio and Ti Marto needed no
college degrees to be able to predict that if the tension between
the pilgrims and the skeptical continued, a civil war might well
be the outcome. The more the Government at Lisboa tried to
suppress the devotion, the more fervently the followers of Our
Lady of Fatima resolved to vindicate her honor.
There was a rather remarkable demonstration on the May 13
following the death of Jacinta. That was the day when the famous
statue was set up in the shrine. A certain man had gone to Cova da
Iria a year or two before with scorn instead of love in his heart.
One story has it that he had a bomb in his pocket, with which
he intended to destroy the chapel in the presence of all the crowd,
but on putting in his hand he found a rosary instead. A more
probable version is that his sister had left the rosary there for his
unbelieving hand to encounter at the right moment. At all events,
he was touched by grace and returned to the practice of his Faith;
and out of gratitude he promised to have a statue made for the
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF_xm1Y7I202ki_kN1dMHk9ouh-omF5DbPPbhlQRLdU3Hr-e8lFtCoQsip2EJKaIOnSXNgpeRVpLdKe-1cgd4_bbanDG9NgzAMAhf3MuYQAk1vEEG7nxX9D2MfOFS8SI1i7LXKNOA=w491-h810-v0
chapel. He went to great pains to ascertain from Lucia just how
Our Lady had looked, and spared no expense to make the work
accurate and beautiful. Whatever might be said of it as art, it
had the power, especially in profile, to suggest something infinitely
pure, simple and spiritual; it could awaken an almost fanatical
devotion in the breasts of many who knelt before it or followed
it in procession; and there were scenes of delirious joy when it
'was first set in its place of honor on May 13, 1920.
That was precisely the day when the Government, resolving to
temporize no longer with an invasion of mysticism, had sent a
couple of regiments of the regular army to Cova da Iria. When
the pilgrims began to arrive they found rifles and bayonets hedging
the scene of the apparitions. Undaunted by this, they formed a still
larger cordon of the barefoot and the humble all about the men
in uniform, and proceeded to recite the Rosary and sing Our Lady’s
songs with such passion that before long the guards themselves
commenced to take part, as Roman legionaries used to join the
unarmed Christians in the arenas. Soon their ranks were broken
and they were on their knees with the others about the azinheira
and the chapel when the new statue was borne tenderly and
triumphantly to the place prepared for it, the place where it has
been honored, with some interruptions, to this day. At one period
of the persecution Maria Carreira used to keep it in her house, for
fear of desecration, except on the days of pilgrimage. Once it was
taken to Lisboa, where it was welcomed by the people with an
enthusiasm to which some attribute the escape of the city thus far
from the doom that Jacinta had foreseen.
Certainly all Portugal was in a sad plight morally, politically
and economically in 1920. In the sixteen years following the
Revolution of 1910 there were sixteen bloody revolutions and
forty-three changes of ministry at Lisboa. The men who fomented
and perpetuated that chaos were part of a revolt against Christianity
which modern Popes have traced to the upheaval of the sixteenth
century and even farther back, and which continues every year
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF4FFIA0HBIAooMAQaqn7O_DwjwDuGioapIHbk80GcyQn_kDUubu2vzwQfymhZ625ASfCScZynYxvkhhWgFBPnM1d6BmXsQIRrbMyGqCfBb8GezNeVcfPhRNiuRnr3h4P0L2aBZXQ=w491-h810-v0
to pursue its goal of world domination. Pope Benedict XV saw
plainly from the watchtower of Saint Peter by the Tiber a great
deal of what has since occurred. “Morals are much more depraved
and corrupt than formerly,” he lamented in 1920. “The fond hope
and wish of every renegade is the speedy rise of some universal
state which is based on the complete equality of men and women
and common ownership of property as a fundamental principle, in
which neither any distinctions of nationality nor authority of parents
over children, nor of public authority over citizens, nor of God over
man living in society, is acknowledged. If these principles are
put into practice, dreadful horrors must necessarily follow.” 1 A
few days later, appealing for help for the new Polish state against
the mysterious Soviet power that had seized control of Russia
only a few weeks after the last apparition at Cova da Iria, he
made another prophetic observation: “Not only is the national
existence of Poland in danger, but all Europe is threatened by the
horrors of fresh wars.” 2
Revolutions are noisy, but God works quietly and patiently. On
August 5, 1920, the very day when Benedict spoke these words,
something occurred which was to have profound effects upon
Portugal, the Fatima devotion, and especially the life of Lucia
Abobora. A bishop was consecrated as head of a new diocese of
Leiria (including Cova da Iria, Aljustrel and all the rest of the
Serra) which the Holy Father had made independent. of the
Patriarchate of Lisboa.
Dom Jose Alves Correira da Silva was a professor at the Seminary
of Porto when Pope Benedict selected him for this important post.
Born near Braga in 1877, he was of medium height, dark and
rather corpulent. His face, like so many in northern Portugal, was
more Celtic than Latin, and concealed, under an habitual expres¬
sion of benignity, certain traces of suffering that were evident only
to those who knew his history. Dom Jose had endured more than
1 Motu Propio, Bonutn Sane, July 25, 1920.
2 Letter, Con Vivo Compiacimento, August 5, 1920.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGLfNYebIGaGkHECH1CkKxNVtlvWddGAlM0NqswCbeqE77FPP03uLZtpCnTBjb1QOw96PyJUqseLqIxWLLJeyu1QNd1gD0YMsG27Z03g3x6XPpYMHsBMCYBzgTwFGeSURDxAPZH=w491-h810-v0
ordinary persecution under the Republic of iqio.ijbragged from
his rectory and thrown into prison, he had been tortured by being
made to stand in icy water day and night, with the result that
he became permanently lame, and walks with great difficulty.
This cross he cheerfully accepted. He had an especial devotion to
the Mother of Sorrows, and had made six pilgrimages to her
shrine at Lourdes, where, after his release, he had begged her,
with other Portuguese refugees, to have mercy on his country.
Later he had returned to give lectures at Porto, where his intelli¬
gence, his gracious and charming manners and his gift for friendship
endeared him to students and fellow teachers, while his sound and
scholarly articles in the Catholic press made him favorably known
as far away as Rome.
One of the first acts of the new bishop when he arrived in the
ancient city of Saint Isabel was the formal consecration of his
diocese, on the feast of the Assumption, 1920, to the Mother of
God. And if ever there was a man who needed her help, it was
he. Ten years of persecution, following other years of complacency
and indifference, had left the Church in a bad way, especially in
the cities. Many clergy were still dispossessed, scattered, exiled,
without incomes. The new diocese had no funds for building and
other expenses. Through ignorance and neglect large numbers of
people had given up Mass and the sacraments. Even the old
episcopal residence, next to the Cathedral of Leiria, was being
used for barracks and government offices, and the new bishop had
to find quarters in a house at an inconvenient distance.
As if there were not enough problems already, there was this
vexing affair of Fatima. Not long after his consecration, Dom Jose
was presented with the 337,000 reis collected by Maria Carreira,
with the request that he dispose of it as he might see fit. About
the same time there came a delegate from the Patriarchate at Lisboa,
who delivered to him the whole dossier of the case. It was now
his problem. The Cardinal Patriarch was no doubt very glad to
be rid of it.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHTmmmhERZlKPgWHp2JbGJhxIjDuxFhW5sOkR1xZkdRlyPWvcMw1im4KyzQWKX_X4EOyBLaYWOIANcJYb20XEGbx8P6GSHtHcnA8mfWkKm5pgDGp-thcPOBuY28iPL0Jh7K-D7e-Q=w491-h810-v0
Dom Jose saw that it was necessary to proceed cautiously. He
had letters from enthusiasts demanding that he recognize the
devotion at once and proceed to build a sumptuous shrine. Yet
there were others from persons worthy of respect, including priests,
denouncing the whole affair as a delusion or a deceit, and arguing
that it gave the enemies of the Chuch one more weapon to use
against her when she sorely needed a period of quiet in which
to repair the ravages of the persecution. It was not easy for a
newcomer to decide. Whatever course he took he was bound to
give offense. It is likely, however, that such a man as Dom Jose
would have acted promptly if he had been able to make up his
own mind. But what was he to think? Two of the chief witnesses
were dead. Lucia always made a bad first impression on anyone
who met her, nor did she ever try to be ingratiating. When all
was said, the story was strange and appeared to be improbable.
One thing seemed evident: something had to be done about
Lucia Abobora, the sole center of the controversy and the sole
witness since the death of Jacinta. There was no doubt that such
a girl, almost untaught, stood in danger from the possible violence
of sectaries who decried the apparitions and from the certain flattery
of devotees inclined to canonize her. It seemed best to have her
leave the Serra for a considerable period. If the affair of Fatima
had been due to any delusion or deceit on her part, her absence
ought gradually to put an end to it. If, on the other hand, the
story was true, devotion would doubtless continue, and a just
decision could be made. After further inquiries and much reflection,
and more than one conversation with Lucia and other members
of her family, the Bishop asked Maria Rosa to visit him and to
bring her daughter on the feast of Saint Anthony, June 13, 1921.
When they had chatted for a while, Dom Jose asked the child
how she would like to leave Aljustrel and attend a good school.
Lucia looked pleased. To be rid of all the questions and con¬
troversies, to be able to forget her grief and loneliness in new
surroundings, to learn to read and write well, to travel—why not?
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHa8N0XoNU9FC4MMISi-23wMJnMg6KGyvUxAYbkZSHsp0XdqXjtKZMJToqaYuTINR_c0uwgewXDHP67MaWa5slsvJpXTVAvTfqdTwKF7SRkzUOLlNtBbJgedHYqMitxPUIH7Yep_Q=w491-h810-v0
Maria Rosa was even more favorably impressed. The continual
strain of having such a daughter, even after the proof of the
apparitions, had been almost more than she could bear. She was
always wondering what was going to happen next. Her hearty
acquiescence, so unflattering to her daughter, may have startled
His Lordship a little, but it also pleased him. He said that Lucia
could enter a school of the Sisters of Saint Dorothy near Porto,
and that she had better leave in a few days.
“Yes, Senbor Bispo.”
“And you will tell no one where you are going,” he added in
his quiet voice.
“Yes, Senbor Bispo.”
“In the school where you are going you will tell no one who
you are.”
“Yes, Senbor Bispo.”
“You will say nothing more to anyone about the apparitions of
Fatima.”
“Yes, Senbor Bispo.”
On the way back to Aljustrel, Lucia and her mother passed
groups of people returning from the pilgrimage at Cova da Iria
singing, “Ave, Ave, Ave Maria!”
Her few preparations were soon made, and she spent her last
day, June 18, in a series of farewell visits. She climbed the slope
of Cabejo for a last look at the valley, where she had first seen
the Angel; and going to the cave, she prostrated herself on the
ground beside the rock where he had knelt, and said the prayers
he had taught her:
“O my God, I believe, I adore, I hope and I love You. . . .
“Most Holy Trinity, Father, Son, Holy Spirit, I adore You
profoundly. . . .”
Lucia climbed over the rocks and went down the other slope
to Valinhos. There at the break of the wall under the olive trees
was what was left of the azinheira where she had seen Our Lady
on August 19, 1917. Pious hands had raised a circle of field stones
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGOQ0TrZwUB4SmqMOui-mbG8pMWAU28C9ReX1ELSxjD0gIdtKlWEQoFfLF-a_tvAa1Yo14vOIPfKRLhHIoeq2Vc3QUpPvGBZiIhrMHdQkjzN8AARpjLkHxB-SBQFVDREp_JE4xzrQ=w491-h810-v0
around it, to the height of about two feet. Usually there are some
daisies there, left by children, and sometimes a vinten or two.
Lucia knelt and poured out her grief and her love. It was not easy
to leave these places! It would not have been easy even if she had
had no memories but those of her games and conversations with
Francisco and Jacinta.
“You will have much to suffer. But the grace of God will be
your comfort. . . .”
She went down the road between the high walls to the Lagoa.
Perhaps there were women washing there, men watering cattle
on the other side; but Lucia saw Francisco and Jacinta, bending over
to drink the brackish water of the barretro. How many times they
met there on their way to the Serra!
There was no one else at Cova da Iria, and she knelt alone by
the plucked tree. Here five times she had seen the Mother of
God; here too she had seen Christ and Saint Joseph. Yet except
for the meagre chapel it was still almost a wilderness of undulating
moors, too far and inaccessible ever to be of much interest to
civilized communities. The heat was withering, the sky a vast
glare of blue. How huge and uninhabited the world could be!
“I am the Lady of the Rosary. . . . Do you suffer a great deal?
Don’t be discouraged. I will never forsake you.”
On the way home Lucia stopped at Fatima to say a last prayer
in Saint Anthony’s Church, where she had been baptized, where
she had received her first Communion, where she had spent so
many hours alone with the hidden Christ. She said goodby to
Saint Quiteria, to Saint Anthony. As she left, the bell in the
tower was beginning to ring the Angelus. ‘‘Behold the handmaid
of the Lord: let it be done according to thy word.”
She crossed the road to the cemetery and knelt by the cross that
showed where Francisco lay. The sun was already low in the
west, and the old wall cast a cool shadow on the grave and on
the kneeling girl.
‘‘Goodby, Francisco; take care of me in heaven.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQETWU8nL5u-zpFHRlqzH0HP-v7edHGkKtX33CcbE30T0Hu4hnnGjnBgs66tGyzrsZd5LPjxSNWHWNo-UYJ-r15T4VmkghaSW5rpa5KtsLR2k7L5i_yXwfk-aI6E5Jx5XK2LfjgW=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 197
On the way down the street of Aljustrel she stopped to say
goodby to her uncle and aunt. It was a sad moment, for these had
been two terrible years for Ti Marto and Ti Olimpia. Not only
had Francisco and Jacinta left them, but Florinda had died in
1920 and Teresa in 1921. Yes, Jacinta had been right again. Four
children dead in something like twenty-three months! It was a
high price that Olimpia paid to become a strong woman.
After a brief prayer in the room where Francisco had died, Lucia
went home, wiping the tears from her eyes, and found her mother
preparing the supper. They were to start before dawn for Leiria,
said Maria Rosa, for no one must know they were going; besides,
it would be a long journey to Porto. Manuel Carreira was coming
to drive them there with his team.
Lucia slipped out to the well for a last look at the sky through
the leaves of the fig trees. It was a serene and beautiful night,
jeweled with stars. The lamps of the angels, she could hear Jacinta
saying.
Maria Rosa was calling her to supper.
Afterwards she went to the corral, where two or three sheep
remained after the flock had been sold. “Goodby, my little friends,”
she said, patting their woolly heads, and went back to the house.
She remembered the rope girdle that Jacinta had given her before
going to the hospital, and burned it. Now it was time for bed.
Fler mother called her at two o’clock in the morning. Ti Carreira
was already waiting outside with the cart. The moon had risen,
paling the stars and making the Serra wonderfully alive and
mysterious. The lamp of Our Lady, Jacinta had called it. Goodby,
goodby! They were soon on the road leading westward through
Chainca and Santocico to Leiria.
When they came to Cova da Iria Lucia said, “Let us stop here
and say the Rosary.”
The three got out of the cart, and went down to the chapel.
There was an oil lamp burning in it at the feet of the statue.
There they knelt and said theTve decades. “Don’t be discouraged.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFup_rgHf8MjZ09iMt19uG6rpD84BCoj-egI9saTLUBwXmSvMe1MnZY-aJXxieLGvnH_mGn8TQT-uzG6NqKTvJ2iBSqg1THsaijP1jUzqm3EXs_vOYxZ5THhq8UljZ2_mSEMQqtAA=w491-h810-v0
I will never forsake you.” But Lucia wept again as she looked for
the last time at the azinheira, plainly gleaming in the eerie light
of the moon.
It was time to go, for they had a ride of nine hours ahead. By
dawn they were far beyond Batalha, between the pines and the
olive groves. At eleven o’clock they were at Leina, where they
were met by a lady sent by the Bishop.
Three hours later Lucia boarded a train for Alfarelos, thence
to Porto. Maria Rosa watched her depart, the tears coursing down
her heavy cheeks. “Goodby, goodby.” The train started noisily.
Lucia Abobora had disappeared from Fatima and from all the
world she had known. To all appearances the Fatima episode was
ended.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE6y-pUVCvvsghHeD3Er52m5WkXITkGUw7kc765a04gzUiiUnwkme9uZwXjjgB_VK3nB6xZP-A7mzE4bHHeNZqjk72_5S1SkA1SgY5NSTzuqQ78dmIK-_KamVyKzms0vKQ2uJV2Jg=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER XVIII
Mass was being said when Lucia and her guide arrived early
next morning at the Asilo of the Sisters of Saint Dorothy at
Vilar, a suburb of Porto, and she was taken at once to the chapel.
She was glad to be able to receive Holy Communion and to
compose herself a little after a night of travel. The vaulted gothic
roof with its ceiling of blue, spangled with gold stars, somehow
made her feel more at home; it was like the one over the altar
at Fatima. The Mass over, she followed the portress to the
sacristy, where she was presented to the Mother Superior and to
the Chaplain.
Reverend Mother was not favorably impressed by the tired girl
of fourteen who stared at her rather sullenly from under dark
brows, and seemed to have a fixed pout on her heavy, half-parted
lips. She had refused to take her at first, telling the Bishop frankly
that she wanted no simpletons in her house, because she did not
want to make simpletons of the other pupils. “Yes, she is simple,”
Dom Jose had said, “but I don’t think you will find her a simpleton,
and I wish you would take her for a while.” As she looked at the
girl herself, Reverend Mother began to wonder if she should not
have been firmer with her old friend, the former professor at the
Seminary of Porto. But having given her word, she proceeded to
carry out all his wishes.
“When they ask you your name,” she said, “you will reply,
‘Call me Maria of the Sorrows.’ ”
“Yes, Reverend Mother.”
“When they ask you where you are from, you will say, ‘I am from
near Lisboa.’ ”
199
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEKDvpi6A4BkuTW-d3LfeQc8eX1_dNznIYQpqL_xFkIUP0TO7bzIGlDyN277a2CmPNJMrtxQaxkSkMCtnQQeMZCAelQZmK052siInVfntBpJtRF-vc1b-juO7grO-OojEOY8PY2vQ=w491-h810-v0
200 Our Lady of Fatima
“Yes, Reverend Mother.”
“As for what happened at Fatima, never again mention it to
anyone, either by question or by answer.”
“Yes, Reverend Mother.”
“Not to anyone. Do you understand?”
“Yes, Reverend Mother.”
“You will not go to walk with the other girls, but you will not
say why you do not go. Do you understand, my dear?”
“Yes, Reverend Mother.”
“That is all.”
The new student was shown her room and given a uniform of
black and white checked gingham such as the others wore. So she
was to be called Maria of the Sorrows. She would have preferred
Maria of Jesus, since she had been christened Lucia of Jesus. But
patience! “You shall have much to suffer.” This was only the
beginning. tD D
For the next four years Maria of the Sorrows led the quiet and
ordered life of an average convent boarding-school student. Every
day after early Mass there would be a succession of classes,
recreation, manual work, prayers; manners to learn, themes to
write, head-splitting declensions and conjugations to memorize,
little speeches to be made. As the months passed she learned sewing,
embroidering, typewriting, cooking, waiting on table, scrubbing
floors, polishing brass and silver. Doubtless there were many
blunders and heartaches at first before she was able to adapt herself
to a routine so different from that of Aljustrel. But after a while the
sense of haste and strain left her, and she became a faithful and
obedient, if not a brilliant, pupil.
During the four years she never revealed her identity. She never
mentioned Fatima; not even to her mother, who visited her twice,
once at Porto and once at the convent of the order in Braga. Not
once in all that time did any of the nuns or students suspect who or
what she was. The wise Mother Superior had taken good care to
carry out the Bishop’s instructions. She understood perfectly why
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFlVc3XFxiEDPURZstJwNLuNWNsohvbiwcgTPx7PjogenebeKpkZCzRG58EDE2kPhOH0eds1wAmWdddLkJqk95XfCqzvuR2-Fk-UDuplMTA4Ps3vp1a-lhRv-4-Ve390xIDshToNA=w491-h810-v0
201 Our Lady of Fatima
it had to be so. If the apparitions turned out to be illusory (so she
explained later) Lucia would gradually forget them, and it was
better so. If they were real, she would never forget and no harm
would be done; but she would escape the danger of learning false
pride through flattery until she had attained a certain degree of
maturity. The young girl herself came to understand the necessity of
this. She began to think of herself naturally as Maria das Dores. At
moments it seemed as if Lucia Abobora had been only a girl she had
dreamed about. If now and then some journalist, investigating the
phenomena of Fatima, traced a clue to the convent door, the
portress would answer calmly, “No, there is no one here called
Lucia.” The Abobora girl, for all practical purposes, was dead.
Yet there were compensations in this lonely existence. To the
casual eye the Asilo de Vilar was a plain building on a hilly street
in a rather dingy part of the town, with a drab seminary on one
side, a factory on the other, and a cemetery near by. It was very
different when one had passed through the quiet building and
ascended the hill on the other side to the gardens that lay hidden,
like all the secrets of the great King, from vulgar prying eyes.
Surely Saint Dorothy, patron of horticulture, must be well pleased
with those six gardens, flamboyant and fragrant with rare and
gorgeous flowers of every color and description.
There was a wonderful view also from the upper windows of
the house or from a nearby hill. One could see the River Douro
coiling like a great flat silver snake as it finished its long course from
the mountains of Spain to the harbor of Porto, where ships of all
nations came and went. It was thrilling to glimpse the pine forest of
Cavaco far away, and beyond the long yellow tongue of beach that
defined the harbor, the sunlight on the vast and blue Atlantic. The
ocean always reminded her of “the grandeur and the power of God.”
Convent routine, which seems so oppressive to people of the
world, becomes delightful and satisfying to those who accept it
freely. Lucia learned to love the order and regularity of it, the
freedom from the petty frictions and worries of family life, the
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFwlhewIAlYac9YZteW3C1JubCclL5DoFj4frK-GZ_8HByFGgmlLUDUyzAf8mYpeBwQjq8y7MCg66fVF6y7bYuxSRDXmvu7ci9vBSOFlpMcTH6OFdwo1I4nyY8Ar8e7ZiLi3vTnxg=w491-h810-v0
sense of living only in the present, and leaving the past and the
future in the hands of God. She came to love the good women
who toiled so cheerfully and unselfishly so that she might have an
education, far from the prying questions of pilgrims and the small
daily vexations of Maria Rosa. Yes, they had faults, there, too;
but their effect was lessened by prayer, and by the firm tact of a
good superior. Here in these cloisters there was peace. Lucia began
to be glad that the Bishop had sent her there.
The sisters on their part soon discovered, what many others
remarked, that first impressions of Lucia were deceptive, perhaps
because her humility kept her from trying to make a favorable
impression. As the Bishop had said, her simplicity was by no means
that of a simpleton. They came to respect and love her ready
obedience, her unselfish willingness to sacrifice her own convenience
for others at all times, her extraodinary devotion to God. More than
most girls of her age, she seemed constantly aware of His presence
no matter what she was doing, and when she had leisure moments
she liked to spend them in the chapel rather than playing or talking.
She read and reread the Portuguese translation of “L’Histoire d’une
dme,” the autobiography of little Saint Therese of Lisieux, who
was beatified in 1923. Lucia’s own experiences helped her to
understand the desire for suffering reflected in many such passages
as this: “My heart thrills at the thought of the frightful tortures
Christians are to suffer at the time of the Antichrist, and I long to
undergo them all. Open, O Jesus, the Book of Life, in which are
written the*deeds of Thy Saints: all the deeds told in that book I
long to have accomplished for Thee.’’ 1 Yet Lucia, like the Little
Flower, realized that her vocation was not martyrdom, but love.
Her other favorite saint was the young Jesuit John Berchmans, who
had given so perfect an example of the virtue of obedience, of
small daily duties heroically performed. “I like these two saints,”
she said, “because I can imitate them.”
1 Chapter XI.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFsN-2KIeaIF7vwi-SxEitJG63iT7TtGginELNU6scXatjufQsgaAhaW2iDa-Dkm6tAnBKHVkHYRaLFEzzBxcxLIGgBhFNia_usHCzOIFUTkRx1KwxQEZNco3NkSHMP4hiHnqaZ=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 203
After four years of this Jife of study, work and prayer at Porto
and other convent schools of the order, Lucia was a well-bred self-
contained young woman of eighteen. The time was coming when
she must make up her mind what to do with the rest of her life.
She had no desire to go back to the world. Perhaps it was her love
for Little Saint Therese that made her think of becoming a discalced
Carmelite. But the'Mother Superior discouraged this. She had had
every opportunity to study Lucia during those four years. “You are
not strong enough for such austerities, child,” she said. “If you really
have a vocation, it would be better to choose some order with a
simpler rule.” Lucia accepted this with her usual humility as the
decision of God, and after some further thought asked to be
admitted to the Institute of the Sisters of Saint Dorothy.
“Why do you wish to be a sister of Saint Dorothy?” the Mother
Provincial asked.
“So that I shall be more free to go to the chapel and pray.”
The Mother Provincial made her wait another year. At the end of
that time, finding her of the same mind, she accepted her as a
postulant. This was in 1925, at the convent in Tuy, just across the
Spanish border. It was the year of the canonization of Little Saint
Therese of Lisieux.
A year later, on November 2, 1926, Lucia became a novice. Dur¬
ing the following year, 1927, she had two visions in which Christ
Himself appeared to her, confirming the requests of His Mother
concerning the devotion to her Immaculate Heart, and giving her
permission to reveal certain things, but not of course the Last Secret
of the July apparition. On November 3, 1928, she took her first
vows as a lay sister. It was not until six years later, on October 3,
1934, that she made these perpetual.
Lucia’s mother, two of her sisters, some cousins and a woman
friend traveled all the way from Aljustrel to be present on that
occasion. It was the first time she had seen Maria Rosa in thirteen
years. 1 hree times the good woman had written to ask what she
wanted as a present on her profession day. The third time Lucia
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHI00xt-78zxgDnkDptWLmzKnR_F5LxqnZ4M5r2_J4cbQn2ocvLNh3K0Sp_dS7YABebmWXK5GtDPnYEHKg-XSRCORNJvZ_jNZW5X6dkH8Ud2HRR4-2LmEPSs-REsTju0Uil9xTxxg=w491-h810-v0
had answered, “Some flowers and some bees.” So Maria Rosa
brought a large bunch of flowers, smelling of the Serra, and a
honeycomb full of bees, no doubt carefully inclosed. Was there
some symbolism in this, or was Sister Maria of the Sorrows human
enough to tease her mother a little for those scoldings and spankings
of other days? Perhaps she merely wanted to spare her an expense
she knew she could not afford.
Since 1934 Sister Dores (as she is commonly addressed in the
cloister) has performed her humble duties in various convents of
the order. She is often heard singing softly to herself as she scrubs
floors, waits on table, or peels potatoes. But she is most happy in the
hours she spends before the Blessed Sacrament. She does not need
images to arouse her devotion. She usually kneels with her head
bowed, her hands open and crossed upon her breast. Thus she
remains sometimes for hours, sometimes all night if permitted.
One day she and another lay sister were walking from the convent
at Tuy in Spain across the international bridge to do some shopping
at Valen^a, which is in Portugal. At the Portuguese end of the
bridge they met three ladies who stopped them and said, “Aren’t
you Sisters of Saint Dorothy? From the convent of Tuy? Oh, how
nice! We are going there. We hear that Lucia is there—the one
who saw Our Lady at Fatima!”
The two Dorotheans looked at each other.
“It’s true that she is in Spain, isn’t it?”
“Oh, no, Senhora, I don’t think so,” said Sister Maria. “In fact
I’m quite sure she is in Portugal now.”
“Oh!”
When the ladies had gone on, Sister Maria das Dores chuckled
very much as the three children had when they tumbled over a
wall in 1917 to escape from questioners.
Just when her silence about her past and Fatima was broken has
not been revealed. Certain it is that on the night of January 25, 1938
(the feast of St. Paul’s conversion, on being blinded by light from
heaven) the young lay sister looked out of the window of her cell
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFq1TxRTf3p5_XvrL0xu0FrW7s1wQtXnKJLTc6DT6-e9uKrbnI-bhjveWZ5yttXsAX-G_REFQpiwHEuGgRnQBq9DmzYxhRpZ3OWyXiNo_5ZhbpJ_iKEKH-98tvNOHquyO9UgBsWzA=w491-h810-v0
and saw the sky aflame, the whole vault of heaven fearfully aglow
with crimson fite which continued balefully from nine o’clock in the
evening until two o’clock in the morning. Next day the newspapers
all over Europe recorded it. People had seen it from the North Sea
to the Adriatic. In south Germany especially it struck fear to many
Catholic hearts. In Fribourg, Switzerland, the sky was said to be
“like a furnace.” The same sinister glare was seen on the Belgian
coast, in Spain, Hungary, Norway, Italy, Poland, and Greece.
Sister Maria of the Sorrows was convinced at once that this was
the strange light Our Lady had predicted at Cova da Ina on July 13,
1917. “When you shall see a night illuminated by an unknown
light, know that it is a great sign that God gives you that He is
going to punish the world for its crimes by means of war, hunger,
and of persecution of the Church and of the Holy Father. To pre¬
vent this-1 come to ask the consecration of Russia to my Immaculate
Heart and the communion of reparation on the first Saturdays. . .
So it had come at last! It was “nigh, even at the gates.” Sister
Maria was undoubtedly allowed to communicate her fears to the
Bishop of Leina at once. That she did so in good time is plain from
what she wrote him at Tuy on August 8, 1941:
“Your Excellency is not unaware that some years ago God
manifested that sign which the astronomers choose to designate by
the name Aurora Borealis. If they look well into it, they will see
that it was not and could not be, in the form in which it appeared,
such an aurora. But be that as it may, God was pleased in this way
to make me understand that His justice was ready to let fall the
blow on the guilty nations, and in this way to begin to ask with
insistence for the reparatory Communion of the first Saturdays and
the consecration of Russia. His end was not only to obtain mercy
and pardon for all the world, but especially for Europe. God in
His infinite mercy made me feel that this terrible moment was
approaching, and Your Excellency is not unaware how on opportune
occasions I used to point it out. And I still say that the prayer and
penance that are done in Portugal have not yet placated the divine
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQElDHCIcRX5mGjD-PqfOIap6TNk70d59BY8FaihwIWprqx9e1d2m0JgVTlNHahNkftHhIzqjFEacgAEVMYDyk4eI3OnNo36n7TOSutbpUiu2mVqfA7CrpYkBUAJDu3QtlpKF0Nl=w491-h810-v0
justice, for they have not been accompanied by contrition or amend¬
ment. I hope Jacinta is interceding for us in heaven.” 2
Pope Pius XI was undoubtedly informed about this. Sister Maria
Lucia was allowed to write him a letter which has not been made
public, but a person worthy of all credit assures me he saw a copy of
it at the beginning of 1939. Whether the Holy Father believed or
doubted the Fatima story, or whether his last illness and many
anxieties made him postpone consideration of it during those months
of his last illness, I do not know. As everyone does know, he died
early in 1939, and the impact of World War II fell upon Poland in
September of that year. Stalin, having instigated the Spanish War
as a prologue, had now given Hitler the green light for the
destruction of a pivotal Catholic country in the east.
“I come to ask the consecration of Russia to my Immaculate
Heart and the Communion of reparation on the first Saturdays.
If they listen to my requests, Russia will be converted and there
will be peace. If not, she will scatter her errors through the world,
provoking wars and persecutions of the Church. The good will be
martyrized, the Holy Father will have much to suffer, various
nations will be annihilated.”
2 Memoir III, p. 7.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEvtdRh-BgJs2BUm9P7F2hmz4MppV1nQSCorCop_cOoqJwxIgjeQtAU9dnlHqgPszcTc1a4k-Mg8O72LB-R8Khca0HmXTK3R2YotJqM_siOcylA-dnv0k5sw50SNg0aszuwWKAhxA=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER XIX
Sister Maria das Dores was not long frightened by the strange
illumination. She could see beyond the hellish thing that was
descending upon Europe, and she knew that the Lady who had
promised never to forsake her would conquer in the end. While
statesmen toiled and lied, while the flower of youth was blasted,
while old cities perished in flame and agony, the lay sister of Saint
Dorothy went about her humble tasks and prayers as usual.
Sometimes sorrow visited her, as when she learned that her mother
had died on the feast of Our Lady of Mount Carmel in 1542; and
the rule of all strict orders, prohibiting members from leaving to
attend the funerals of relatives, must have augmented the grief
of a daughter who had long since forgiven the severities of poor
Maria Rosa. Yet there are many joys also in convent life. Not the
least was the good news that came from time to time from Cova da
Iria.
The cult had grown astonishingly since her departure in 1921.
The Bishop’s attitude had been one of encouragement from the
beginning. Some say he received a secret message from Our Lady
through Lucia. Others insist that he was won over by a miraculous
ram of flowers that he saw at Cova da Iria. His unwillingness to
publicize himself or to exploit Sister Maria das Dores during her
lifetime makes it difficult to get at the exact truth. Certain it is,
however, that only four months after her leavetaking he permitted
the first Low Mass in the chapel of the apparitions, and purchased
the surrounding land from the Aboboras and others. In November
of the same year (1921) he set some men to work making a cistern
near the shrine to collect rain for pilgrims, and was deeply impressed
when a spring of pure clear water bubbled up from the dry rocky
soil, increasing in volume until it filled thirty-six taps and became
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGv7DEWcMXQUEwbOHkyAO2pnSJxnya7vR55b_UNmvdhpFICq05YpKXkfu6ZO0Bpq_1bFc_pXjU7_u_TZ9JuVnCrYJ-mZcgzJjq_WVXbjaXB5msJriEHz5W5mRYXssUQO1zec1SBjA=w491-h810-v0
the main supply of the peasants roundabout, and a source of health
to many sick persons who drank of it.
Opening the formal canonical investigation the following year,
the Bishop wrote: “Of the three children who said they were
favored by the apparition, two were dead before our arrival in this
diocese. We have questioned the only survivor several times. Her
account and her responses are simple and sincere and we have
discovered in them nothing against faith or morals.” Expressing
doubt that any qualities or powers of an almost untaught girl of
fourteen could have drawn such crowds to the scene (especially
after her departure) , or that any natural charms of that remote and
barren place could have attracted them, he appointed a committee
of investigation, and called upon his people to furnish any
information they might have, whether favorable or unfavorable.
The number of pilgrims steadily increased. Cardinal Mendes
Belo, who had laughed at the affair in 1918, changed his opinion
before his death in 1922, and regretted that he could not go to
Fatima. The unrelenting opposition of the Government and of the
Liberals of Santarem and Ourem served only to whip the fervor of
the devout to a steadier flame. On March 6, 1922, for example,
the little chapel was destroyed by four bombs, though the altar
and shrine were saved when a fifth failed to explode; but on the
following May 13 some 60,000 believers assembled, despite the
mobilization of the Republican Guard by the Governor of Santarem,
and made humble reparation to Our Lady for the outrage. In 1927
the Bishop presided over a pilgrimage for the (irst time. The
following year he welcomed 300,000 persons in one day. In 1930 he
officially recognized and accepted the devotion, declaring the visions
of the three children worthy of faith, and asking the people to show
their gratitude to the Mother of God by the purity and sincerity of
their lives. In 1931 he was joined by all the other Portuguese
bishops, including the new Patriarch, Dom Manuel Gonsalves
Cardinal Cerejeira, in honoring her.
Several hundreds of miraculous cures meanwhile had been
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEVYCkiYm4kghenY9HZZ8pExDzncTPlM2UEYqn4TDxoL2mej5Zcp2fctvCeZt1owhJz5xSg5VVbwPQarNtSG4l1EvtgcNO5v-3dpK0Sqwt9gKTxuBUZpsABzN9Qo6hWZkMdw5lUOg=w491-h810-v0
registered: cures of tuberculosis, Pott’s disease, blindness, deafness,
spinal meningitis, cancer, paralysis and many other afflictions of
which Father Fonseca, for example, gives ample accounts, with
names, dates, and details, in his well-documented book. Only last
June (1946) there was a great sensation over the instant healing of
Miss Maria Jose da Silva of Tomar, of tuberculosis. The following
September 13, when a lame youth threw away his crutches during
a procession, and walked upright for the first time in many years,
he was congratulated by a great throng of men and women, many
of whom were weeping with joy, among them the ex-Queen of
Italy and her daughter. Of the moral cures—the conversions, the
broken homes restored, the return of hardened sinners to the practice
of the Faith—there have been thousands.
To Our Lady of Fatima the Portuguese attribute many of the
blessings, both spiritual and material, that have come to their coun¬
try in recent years. The Republic which so long persecuted the
Church and the Fatima pilgrims vanished in the anarchy of 1926.
Three generals, amid popular acclaim, took over the government,
and by various steps set up the dictatorship of Salazar which has
since ruled the nation. It is not within the scope of this work to
appraise any existing political regime. Whatever else may be said
for or against the present government at Lisboa, it has at least
maintained peace and order; hence the Church, purified by persecu¬
tion, has found time for recuperation and restoration, for training
new priests, building seminaries, bringing lapsed Catholics back
to the fold. Tremendous progress has been made in many ways
under a new and vigorous hierarchy.
Yet there is much evidence to support the fears of Sister Maria
das Dores that her people have not done nearly enough by way of
reparation for the blasphemies and indifference of former times.
After all the marvels of Fatima, only 4,000,000 out of almost
8,000,000 Portuguese pretend to be Catholics in any sense of the
word. There are hardly more than 3,000 priests—about one for each
1,300 professing Christians. The pdroco of Vimiero, birthplace of
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEKMK6T8A3tabSeHxhRvb16jKNuurU-NMvlC6MUXh6kF--X8-HhJCqUFSfMkRl2aC7q6cn0eSj20h94Z4-BrZtbScKzqjOCiL6qh0jfPRABCszwzH7aj80Mvywc9eS5sTlxZ0dWqw=w491-h810-v0
Mr. Salazar, told me that he usually had but 150 out of a population
of 1200 at his Sunday Mass. In the large cities there is bitter
anti-clericalism, and much Communistic activity. Churches are
still closed at sundown for fear of desecration; nuns do not dare
appear on the streets in their habits; and the Salazar government
still retains some of the church property confiscated by the Republic.
Mr. Salazar limits his practice of the Catholic faith to a barely
discernible minimum; and as one of his officials said to me, “It is
a mistake to call our regime Catholic. So far as the Church is
concerned we are neutral.” This neutrality has helped in one way.
However, when the clergy tried to extend Catholic Action to aid
the underpaid and underfed workers, they were told in no uncertain
terms to confine their labors to “spiritual” affairs. They are not
allowed to apply the social principles of the great encyclicals of
Popes Leo XIII and Pius XI. They are not permitted to make any
effective appeal to the anti-clerical masses in the cities. The
Voz da Fatima stands almost alone against a financial empire
ruled from London when it warns the rich that in paying starva¬
tion wages they court the very red ruin they fear.
Nevertheless the priests and people are grateful for such freedom
as they have received, and hope that the rest will follow in time.
They are especially thankful that their country escaped the
harrowing experiences of Spain in 1936. Anticipating the reign of
terror that began there in July, 1936, and fearing its spread through¬
out the peninsula, all the Portuguese bishops made a solemn vow at
Cova da Ina as early as May of that year, that if Our Lady
protected their land from war and red revolution they would return
to make a public thanksgiving. This promise they kept at the
great national pilgrimage of May 13, 1938, amid scenes of incredible
rejoicing.
There were similar manifestations in the subsequent years, when
many had become convinced that Our Lady of Fatima had saved
Portugal from World War II, as she had told the children she
would. When the twenty-fifth anniversary of the apparitions was
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFd3jHAN1YwYlOWTgjGEVMlMWYGiNxsXN6-VhYTv0nMQz_Nz0C2stlq3wNtUbWJr-GN6knOTjZkFavKBaW07zMSkZ3yckba27yv8goXCzDOBGyC66dxRMZZ4hvy4qtwszO3wWBFGg=w491-h810-v0
21 I Our Lady of Fatima
celebrated on May 13, 1942, a telegram came from Pope Pius XII
with his blessing to all the pilgrims, and to Portugal. Before the
end of that year he consecrated the entire world to the Immaculate
Heart of Mary in the presence of 40,000 persons at Saint Peter’s in
Rome. Thus the Fatima devotion overflowed the boundaries of the
terra de Santa Maria and became worldwide.
To Sister Dores it seemed the fulfilment of the prophecy of
Jacinta a quarter of a century before: “The Holy Father in a church
before the Immaculate Heart of Mary, praying, and so many people
praying with him.” It was a step also toward the final accom¬
plishment of the wishes of Our Lady, even if the Holy Father did
not mention Russia specifically. In his prayer he referred to “the
peoples separated from us by error and by schism, especially the
one which professes a singular devotion for you, the one in which
there is not a single house which did not display your venerated
ikon, today perhaps hidden and put away for better days.” The
public consecration of Russia was yet to be made.
Sister Dores meanwhile remains not only the sole surviving
witness of the apparitions, but the only person in the world who
knows the Last Secret, of which nothing has been divulged except
that it means woe to some and joy to others. I heard in Portugal
from a man of the highest credibility that when she was ill and
in danger of death in 1939, she obtained permission from Our Lady,
at the Bishop’s instance, to write it out and seal it up in an envelope
marked, “Not to be opened until i960.”
If this cannot be verified at present, there is no such mystery
about the four memoirs she composed at the command of Dom Jose
to make sure that her version of the events of 1917 would not be
lost. These accounts, written on ordinary lined notebook paper in
a precise, clear, regular, rather commonplace handwriting, suggest
a sane and well-balanced personality. It is interesting to compare
them with the manuscripts of Saint Teresa of Jesus in the
Escorial. Both were written rapidly, with the intention of imparting
truth rather than achieving literary effect. Neither has the smudges
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFJIk1R788ekQrO5GVegyY0ERLzQad_rmu3CT578YF2v5SCF4aweh6VPPnMCaanW7Tyjorn8UX5-vNYoLG6vImj0w2fQmYYHWWEF8yF6_mYkS-vfXweefnr8-Yoptpv9Ho4g6hP=w491-h810-v0
and other irregularities that betray neurotic or psychotic tendencies.
And if Sister Dores lacks the individuality, the grand manner, the
veritable genius of the Spanish mystic, at least she is not so
disdainful of grammar and punctuation!
The first account, written in 1936, contains many of the incidents
I have related, besides a touching little poem in memory of “dear
Jacinta,” somewhat after the pattern of Santa Teresa’s lyrics;,
O tu que a terra
Passaste voando
Jacinta querida
Numa dor intensa
Jesus amando
Nao esque^as a prece
Que eu te pedia
Se minha amiga
Junto do trono
Da Virgem Maria.
Lino de candura
Perola bnlhante
Oh! la no Ceu
Ondes vives tnunfante
Serafim d’amor,
Com teu irmaosinho
Roga por mim
Aos pes do Senhor.
This memoir concludes with a request that if the Bishop publishes
what she has written, he will say nothing of her “poor miserable
self,” and assures him that if he burns it without reading it she
will be happy, having composed it only out of obedience.
It was in the second memoir, of 1937, that Sister Dores first
let fall a casual reference to the Angel of Peace. This was some-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEzfsabMYHyVN5evmumMfgAZ9Tn00gvaDJMt1e95S1qn54rDHoVke5PWbn9pUSazmMsM2e_jed652jGzOFk0Ekgdjl2OsxocQXC8hk1HvCZ3SjNimINshCbFhopq-xjGwR7scksYA=w491-h810-v0
2I3 Our Lady of Fatima
thing like a bombshell after twenty-one years of silence, and in
some quarters it provoked consternation and even indignation.
How could this be explained? What would people think? One
learned visitor went so far as to say:
“You will have to do many turns in Purgatory, Sister, for con¬
cealing such a thing all this time!”
“I haven’t the least fear of Purgatory on that account,” she
replied calmly. “I have always acted under obedience, and there
is no penalty or punishment for obedience.” 1
As a matter of fact the Angel story, confusing as it has been
to some persons, supports her credibility. A pseudo-mystic or
impostor clever enough to invent so remarkable a tale would never
have drawn suspicion upon herself by a startling and uncalled-for
addition many years later. And a psychopath suffering from
delusions would have had other hallucinations, surely, in all that
time. Yet her superiors and associates agree that she is a perfectly
normal religious, who has never shown any inclination to parade
her spiritual experiences.
The third memoir, written August 8, 1941, contains further
details about Jacinta, and an account of the weird light of January
25, 1938.
When the Bishop demanded a fourth and definitive account,
Sister Dores retired to the garret of the convent at Tuy on the
morning of December 8, 1941, and after praying a long while
for the grace to set everything down corrdctly and in order, sat
on a trunk near a small window, and holding a pad of notepaper
on her lap, began her fourth and longest manuscript, in which
she recorded, for posterity, the exact words of the Angel and of
the Lady of the Rosary, with all the circumstances she could
remember of each apparition in succession. The beginning, in
which she tells of opening the New Testament more than once
in search of light, is somewhat long and self-conscious; here
1 Memoir IV, p. 30.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFJvxxvONbMhNZDacAWZg4zuhCz4q7bDgy2u6LDSlL_PPqAJp7MMB9rU81mbDxk1wJescG854KXKcVuzy84pgWlqFXraHBwZQcnmqm2aNzamYX_luI37rcBuioDM3tm0FLvXj9o-A=w491-h810-v0
perhaps she dramatizes herself a little. Once under way, the narra¬
tive proceeds swiftly and objectively. At the end, she makes some
trenchant criticisms of errors she has found in the best-known books
about the Fatima apparitions.
It was only last year, after a quarter of a century, that she was
permitted to return to the scenes she had described in that historic
document. Perhaps it was fitting that her triumph and vindication
should be reserved for the memorable pilgrimage of May 13, 1946.
The Second World War was over, and the Portuguese well under¬
stood from what futile horrors they had been saved. Although
rain fell all night and in the morning, a crowd of more than
700,000 pilgrims gathered in the Cova da Iria to give thanks to
Our Lady of Fatima. Almost a tenth of the population of the
country was there.
A second-hand but unforgettable impression of that demonstra¬
tion came to me in some motion pictures I saw two months later
at the Bishop’s house in Leina. The expanse of black bobbing
umbrellas, the Portuguese prelates and the Papal Nuncio humbly
standing in the rain, the thousands upon thousands of handker¬
chiefs that fluttered like the waves of a white sea or the wings
of innumerable angels beating the wind—there was something
unheard-of, almost apocalyptic in the magnitude, the fervor and
the patience of that prodigious host. For parallels one must go
back to the children of Israel singing with Moses in the wilderness,
or the medieval crusaders shouting back at a Pope Urban II or a
Saint Louis, “It is the will of God!”
Of the crusading enthusiasm of that pilgrimage, too, I obtained
some qualitative idea, at least, from the one I attended the following
July; for the pattern is much the same month after month. On
the twelfth, the roads are full of picturesque groups, men pre¬
dominating and most of them poor. By nightfall they are scattered
over the great bowl of the Cova da Iria, finding places to hitch
their burros or lay down their packs, to eat, to rest. Loaves of
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEs9Bgyt0ipK0K9bvNAqo_Js2SfiQ4DB_MEBLbhhzbbm-wQSn9IPX_4k1tYLfRF7L1Rp60SYv7KRojXjqWBWel9e7wzkS9PGg1iSjLF_fdcF2OjJgkmWjLz7_NiBviSSCvAszQpTg=w491-h810-v0
2,5 Our Lady of Fatima
tough brown bread and bottles of wine arc drawn from wicker
baskets, earthen water-bottles are passed around or replenished
at the holy well, blankets arc spread on the drv ground under the
olive or carrasqucira trees. 1 lere an old woman slowly advances
toward the chapel on bare and bleeding knees. There a stunted
peasant is warming some soup for his wife and children over four
candles, which he shields from the breeze with his body and his
sombrero.
All the crowd are well supplied with such tapers, each encircled
with a paper guard. By ten o’clock thousands of these tiny orange-
tinted lamps are burning as the procession begins to form; they
look strangely dim and ethereal as the full moon mounts higher
in the east, Hooding the Serra with an unearthly radiance and
lending a peculiar steely-blue cast to the infinite dome above.
As the wind comes stronger from the far ocean and the western
mountains, the torches flicker madly, yet few are extinguished.
Now they have assumed the order and form of a Ions’- strasjsilinw
procession that slowly moves up the .hill tow aril the main highway.
I lie resonant voice of a priest is heard on a loud speaker, leading
in the Rosary. Thousands of voices high and deep, male and female,
respond with a thunderous and passionate rhythm; Santa Maria,
mat dc Dens, rogai f>or nos pecadores agora e na bora da tiossa
mortal'1
The head of the procession has reached the top of the hill, has
turned, and is coming down another road toward the basilica. 1 he
slow majestic pace, the dancing of innumerable lights, the hoarse
and throaty voices convey an overpowering impression of an army
not of blood but of prayer, a host of crusaders bearing the light
of truth through the darkness of a hostile world, fearless of time
and death, certain of triumph. What can resist these voices and
footsteps of yesterday and of tomorrow?
Between the mysteries of the Rosary the marchers fling the Aves
of their favorite hymn to the metallic sky:
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEmS7fOFeq7Yq_IhcG2dRqRd6umOpxYymrWBog36LXhhZo63VNWFPlbWbWWy4k44-N8uARVPvAiGlP317XxWwKl1YcknANkcJENkOqNqcH4af6rrY7xQBW3dxj25VRy2l6CPo2_=w491-h810-v0
A treze de Maio
Na Cova da lria
Apar’ceu brilhanda
A Virgem Maria.
Ave, Ave, Ave Maria!
Ave, Ave, Ave Maria!
Individuals cry out between the strophes their own hopes and
supplications, sometimes with heartbreaking sobs: “Lord, we adore
you!” “Lord, we love you!” “Jesus, have mercy on us! Lord,
you can cure me if you will!” Yes, these voices seem to belong
to lustier and heartier times than ours. They come from the plain
of Esdraelon, from the walls of Jericho and Constantinople and
the fields of Tunis, like the pulses of faith and of human personality
breaking through the mediocrity and regimentation of a machine
age- The column of lights finally dissolves at the basilica. The
thousands slowly push their way inside to attend Benediction, and
then to form in long cues by the confessional boxes, patiently
waiting to tell their sms so that they can receive Holy Communion
at dawn. The prayers, the songs, the exclamations continue through
the night. But at two in the morning many thousands have
already disposed themselves for sleep. Around every tree, around
the well, around the concrete platform of the chapel of the appari¬
tions, one sees them lying prone in circles, the heads toward the
center, the bare feet of women and the hobnailed boots of men
grotesquely forming the perimeters. Here under one blanket lie a
young peasant and his wife. Under two or three others are huddled
a man and a woman and their four children. A baby is inert on
the breast of her sleeping mother. All are strangely silent and
motionless in the deathlike slumber of those who labor in the
fields and think nothing of walking fifty miles to honor the
Mother of God.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEZJz4ZWT50rGZAgueTkbyLjK1kA_VqeFAGc_H0ViB3EMf4eq288v3vNa-rKiR0GVAZoqNHX28kI6OVQrSJgBqtyyoVjprcXCEAuSBfrDQFevL6niw5kytXVXup5tCJw-s4QOWL-Q=w491-h810-v0
On the morning of the thirteenth, after a humble breakfast of
dry bread wherever they have slept, the people form another
procession, which follows the same route to the highway and
thence back to the basilica. This time the white statue of Our
Lady of Fatima has been taken reverently from the chapel, and
is born at the head of the column on the shoulders of six sturdy
men; while in front, leading this second crusading army in the
full glare of the summer heat, walk the Archbishop of Evora and
the Bishop of Leina. Dom Jose goes slowly and painfully, with
stiff and swollen knees, an ungainly but heroic figure in crimson
and geld. As he finally climbs the steps of the basilica he is
smiling graciously, and few can guess what it has cost a gallant
gentleman to pay his devoir to his Lady.
Perhaps the most moving of all the scenes is the one just between
the High Mass and the noonday Benediction. In a special place
roped off for them the sick are waiting patiently for this moment,
some on stretchers, some in wheeLchairs with nurses, some hobbling
on crutches; paralyzed children in the arms of mothers; the blind,
the emaciated. A priest descends from the basilica carrying the
Sacred Host in a monstrance. All who are able fall on their
knees as he passes between the rows of the doentes and holds
It up before the face of each, imploring the Lord to heal and
to restore. I will not attempt to describe those faces, those eyes;
there are no words for such love, hope, desperation, adoration.
One can only think of the atmosphere of the Gospels, as Lucia
has reminded us. “And Jesus went about all the cities and towns,
teaching in their synagogues and preaching the gospel of the
Kingdom, and healing every disease and infirmity. And seeing
the multitudes, he had compassion on them, because they were
distressed, and lying like sheep that have no shepherd.” 2 There
are no sensational episodes on this occasion; later, however, we
hear that a man from the north has been cured of cancer.3
2 St. Matthew, IX, 35-36.
3 Voz da Fatima, August 13, 1946.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGpgoCycX_TnTV9P02zwkilsPPfPANFmhqlN-VX9KxzijsW2x3Wlp52zPAJ7PtQxy7Lq-DlIFQ9GOxqPdl7uk63Ywu__axGE_Px_10tjhZ4vIzibmC-XO93OG-jw4p5YPQXPq3gXQ=w491-h810-v0
At last it is finished, and the statue is being borne back to its
place in the small chapel. All the people wave their handkerchiefs
up and down in farewell. The effect is tremendous; it is more
eloquent than all the shouts and the final Aves. But when the
figure of Our Lady has passed, the multitude quickly melts
away. Only a few small groups are still gathered here and there.
Still fewer have taken the trouble to follow the statue to its home.
There they are, kneeling about the humble building, still mutter¬
ing their love and their petitions—most of them women, and
very poor ones too in dusty garb, with black kerchiefs over their
heads, and bare feet. Among them on July 13 I saw Ti Olimpia,
the mother of Francisco and Jacinta, earnestly saying her Rosary.
Such, on a much grander scale and despite the rain, must have
been the atmosphere at the greatest of all the pilgrimages, the
one on May 13, 1946. On that day, too, as a climax, the three-
quarter-of-a-milhon pilgrims heard the voice of the Vicar of Christ
speaking from Rome; and the force of all his words tended to
heighten the impression of a modern Crusade.
“Your great concourse, the fervor of your prayers, the thunder-
of your acclamations, all the holy enthusiasm which vibrates
without cease in your hearts, and finally the sacred rite which in
this moment of incomparable triumph has just been performed,”
said the Pope, “call to Our mind another multitude innumerably
greater, other cries of worship far more ardent, other triumphs yet
more divine, another hour solemnly eternal, the endless day of
eternity when the glorious Virgin, triumphantly entering the
Heavenly Homeland through the nine blessed choirs of Angels,
was raised even to the Throne of the Most Holy Trinity, Who
placed upon her brow the triple diadem of glory, and presenting
her to the celestial court seated at the right hand of the immortal
King of Ages, crowned her Queen of the Universe. And the King
saw that she was truly worthy of such honor, glory and empire,
because more filled with grace, more holy, more beautiful, more
divine—incomparably more so than the greatest saints and the
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE1EQmAH-zVZ6bIctHQ7H-d5vuEw1zZK8bq5NrX_HURVHmYn-bH_u4NmPMmji5OK5gyDq7GNr_7aEUggPiCi2DVgpMWF56Zze1watwRfVb6lXNmeT3zIEevGt4pXGiBfU8OE2b1Kw=w491-h810-v0
sublimest angels; because she is . . . the first-born daughter of
the Father, pure Mother of the Word and beloved bride of the
Holy Ghost, because Mother of the divine King, of Him to
Whom from her maternal womb the Lord God gave the throne
of David and everlasting Kingship in the House of Jacob: He
Who Himself proclaimed to have received all power in heaven
and earth—He the Son of God decrees for His heavenly Mother
all glory, power, and majesty of His Kingdom. . . .
“So the Church salutes her Lady and Queen of the Angels and
Saints, of Patriarchs and Prophets, of Apostles and Martyrs, of
Confessors and Virgins; she acclaims her Queen of Heaven and
earth, most glorious, most worthy Queen of the Universe . . .
the light shining in the sky amid the tears of this exile. . . .
“You, by crowning the image of Our Lady of Fatima, signed
as it were a document of faith in her supremacy, a loyal sub¬
mission to her authority, a filial and constant correspondence to
her love. You did yet more: you enlisted as crusaders in the con¬
quest and reconquest of her Kingdom, which is the Kingdom of
God, that is to say you bound yourselves before heaven and
earth to love her, to venerate her, to serve her, to imitate her, so
that with her blessing you may better serve the Divine King; and
at the same time you bound yourselves to labor that she may be
loved, venerated, and served all around you, in the family, in
society, in the world.” 4
Sister Dores may have heard the Holy Father’s words, but she
did not see the demonstration. It was a week later, on May 20, that
she arrived, with the Mother Provincial of her order, at Cova da
Iria. She had left as an untutored girl of fourteen. She returned
a calm and poised woman of thirty-nine. Most of the countryside
was unchanged. But her brown eyes opened wide with amazement
when she looked down on what had been the wilderness of Cova
da Iria. It was partly inclosed by a wall. From two majestic gates
4 Voz da Fatima, June 13, 1946.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGh5btpZz3B9WWYiFbxm9twRieREy1pJDUqzAqyy8G5HFImpYrmgr2mIm0_VuF_MELM3E9BtTsueQHYUThWyz7swMsOdhppEksXbdB4-6ij27wJ4S8kRYX4BMSe_D-YIKe7rR77hw=w491-h810-v0
descended roads that joined at the miraculous fountain, and then
ascended to the lofty white basilica on the northern hill. The chapel
of the apparitions had been completely rebuilt. To the left was an
imposing hospice containing two or three chapels, the Bishop’s
quarters, and a seminary. On the opposite hill workmen were
laying the massive foundations of another such building. Ground
was being broken for an Italian seminary to the northeast. On
another hill stood the new convent of the Discalced Carmelite
nuns from Belgium.
Hardly anything was the same there except the carrasqueira
tree to which the children had fled from the first flash of light on
May 13, 1917- From one of its limbs hung an angelus bell, which
Joao, the lame son of Maria Carreira, would ring at suitable hours;
he also sold rosaries, and attended to the fountain. And hovering
birdlike about the chapel of the apparitions at almost any hour
one could see his mother—Maria da Capelhina, they now call
her—removing withered flowers from the place where the azinheira
had been, or going about on her hands and knees, dusting the
concrete floor with a whisk-broom.
Ti Marto was very much in evidence those days, wearing a
blue shirt, with a black tie on Sundays; and in the lapel of his
well-brushed coat the button of the Catholic Action League of
Farmers.
“Yes, I believed in it from the first,” he would say. “Once a
Spaniard came here and told me he could^look at the sun any
time. I dared him to prove it. He got under a fig tree and looked
up through the leaves. ‘Oho!’ said I, ‘come out here and look
at it.’ Of course he couldn’t. Then there was a Communist here
who said that it was all nothing but one great big stupidity. I
said to him, ‘Let me see you go back to your own town and
make a stupidity as big as this one.’ ”
When I asked him if he still hoed his maize and dug his
potatoes, he said apologetically:
“No, I don’t do much work now. I’m only seventy-three, but
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGUOdfXP5zPAvOLA4ikzBc-A2RuyFop8K1UoueEQchJ1tymkYUt6JVYGyDX-8Or6RPc1Xoe8jt3xdHuPhZdQ6sS1_FbvwGLJXLxcp8_AdYJxOsh_nB1RaHNEZWwqqQnYz26lMj69g=w491-h810-v0
my legs are no good any more—they’re almost as bad as Dom J/5 5 5
ose s.
Dom Jose, as the people affectionately call their Bishop, gives
the impression of never allowing his affliction to stand in the way
of anything he resolves to do; and the morning after the arrival
of Sister Dores he came from Leina to say Mass at the little
chapel especially for her.
Meanwhile the news of her coming had created quite a sensa¬
tion all over the Serra. Soon people were flocking from all sides
to catch a glimpse of her, and a crowd followed wherever she went.
Naturally she visited Aljustrel to speak with her sister Maria, her
aunt Olimpia, and other old friends and neighbors. She went
with Father Galamba, representing the Bishop, to verify all the
scenes of the events of 1917. She pointed out exactly where the
Angel had appeared at Cabe^o and at the well. She watched the
women washing their clothes at the Lagoa. A priest who saw
her standing at Vahnhos, gazing at the pile of stones where Our
Lady had appeared in August, 1917, told me he was much im¬
pressed by her detachment and lack of vanity. She seemed wholly
unaware that anyone was looking at her.
After a visit to the Church of Saint Anthony at Fatima, where
she noted all the changes and improvements, she crossed the road
and entered the creaking gate of the old cemetery. Where she
had left the little cross on the grave of Francisco, she found an
impressive monument inscribed:
HERE LIE THE MORTAL REMAINS
OF JACINTA AND FRANCISCO MARTO
TO WHOM OUR LADY APPEARED.
For Jacinta, too, had returned to Fatima, as she had promised,
long after her death. It was in 1935 that her body was taken from
the cemetery at Ourem, and laid in a common grave with her
brother’s. When both coffins were opened, nothing was found of
Francisco but his bones, but Jacinta’s face was intact and incor¬
rupt; she seemed to be only asleep, waiting for the Resurrection,
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEE6C35z0ZMcyppdBpaWdEUghVb_FbNHEzdzZbw-RC1-hPpIoA01Z4q04HNzNEOCcVocK7BS6XuSbNuCw-vvnxfhzOhNFKY5qqq2plmuiwMFh9Lk7nXCEc5ZiUeFS9HY6KRmK4YUQ=w491-h810-v0
and the good odor of Paradise hung about her. Her mother was
one of those who saw her. Ti Marto told me he was there, but
could not get a very good look. “Ai, Jesus, there was such a crowd!
I couldn’t get near enough.”
Sister Maria das Dores went back to her convent. A few days
later the Bishop ordered evidence taken in the cause for the
beatification of those who, if these efforts succeed, will one day
be known as Saint Jacinta and Saint Francisco of Fatima.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHJnT02aSWlGdA3CmX5pWZ_SXN9ICj90cTJZGfPLIkZftYHhfinwXLrepV2xio3bpQe6Ce6MQxD1sjcJSnYEWToSyRZKQzZAGy7Wlb2M8qIwxj0IW4pycG6Q89nZ65_QUj-EbeKRg=w491-h810-v0
EPILOGUE
It was in the convent of the Dorothean Sisters at Vilar, near
Porto, that I had the privilege of conversing with Sister Maria
das Dotes on the afternoon of Monday, July 15, 1946. She seemed
uncomfortable at first, and probably was, for she dislikes such inter¬
views intensely, and submits to them only when ordered to do so.
She wrung her hands nervously. Her pale brown eyes looked
rather guarded and unfriendly. There was not much conviction
in the high and timorous voice.
A few moments later I had almost forgotten this first impression.
She had begun to feel more at ease. She laughed readily; and
when she smiled, a little dimple would appear on each cheek.
The voice now sounded natural and sincere. There was intelligence
in this face, too, and charm. It was impossible not to like her
and to trust her.
First I presented a few questions from America, some perhaps
a little obvious and unnecessary. One, from a sculptor, was
whether the rosary in the hand of Our Lady had had five or
fifteen decades.
“I didn’t count them,” she said quickly, with a mischievous
smile.
“When the Angel of Peace gave you Holy Communion at
Cabe^o, did it seem to you like a dream or a vision, or was it
like the reality of receiving Holy Communion in a church?”
She hesitated for the right word. “I cannot be absolutely sure
of that, because I was not in any ordinary state of mind during
such an experience, and there was something so intimate, so
interior, so intense about the apparition of the Angel and what
he said and did. But I believe it was like the real experience of
receiving in a church, for I felt the contact of the Host.”
223
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFykMpsOI4ti2Q82kvT5WTvhXESLNAdH6V8qr078wluMiJVDK3jp4tJnzB6Ku52cB_ntrQUo096fHIOdqlYLLGrGZVoRJUnJYvVuw-_jyzJNn1V7iS1voBf3XXBfTghOJI-xbQwDg=w491-h810-v0
224 Our Lady of Fatima
“Did you see Our Lord in the year 1927?”
“Twice.” The answer was prompt and matter-of-fact. I was
not permitted to question her as to what He said. Nor was I
allowed to ask about the conversations she has had with Our
Lady since 1917. It is well known that there have been several
such apparitions. According to the Voz da Fatima, published at the
shrine, the Blessed Mother said to her in her cell, on December
10, 1925: “Look, my daughter, at my Heart surrounded with
the thorns with which ungrateful men wound it by their blas¬
phemies and iniquities. You, at least, try to console me, and
announce that I promise to assist at the hour of death, with the
graces necessary for salvation, all those who, on the first Saturdays
of five consecutive months, confess, receive Holy Communion,
recite part of my Rosary, and keep me company for a quarter of
an hour meditating on its mysteries with the intention of offering
me reparation.” Sister Dores made this known, and it has given
great impetus to the Immaculate Heart devotion.
The interview continued:
“When you reported the words of the Angel and of Our Lady,
did you give the exact words as they were spoken, or only the
general sense?”
“The Angel’s words had an intense and overpowering quality,
a supernatural reality, that could not be forgotten. They seemed
to engrave themselves exactly and indelibly upon the memory.
It was different with the words of Our Lady. I could not be sure
that every word was exact. It was rather the sense that came to
me, and I put what I understood into words. It is not easy to
explain this.”
“Our Lady showed you many souls going to hell. Did you get
the impression from her that more souls are damned than saved?”
This amused her a little. “I saw those that were going down.
I didn’t see those that were going up.”
“Does the statue in the shrine at Cova da Iria look like the
Lady you saw there?”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF3dw45H04yGo2yVutzoR_DIvgM7JnaxJGWYUfw9xMZf3rgxZBtlPxj9-E7jUdjmRfLErgejNPa_Ptc4NK931Bc7z8-0FKEF0ck-Of5C_8AM92TbItZS7wOLjgbZyNnE5U4lFLW2g=w491-h810-v0
“No, not much. I was disappointed when I saw it. For one
thing, it was too gay, too alegre. When I saw Our Lady she was
more triste, or rather more compassionate. But it would be impossi¬
ble to describe Our Lady, and it would be impossible to make a
statue as beautiful as she is.” She left the room a moment and
returned with a small print of Our Lady on some sort of trans¬
parent plastic material, the most simple and unadorned I had seen,
and handed it to me. “This is the picture that comes nearest to
what I saw,” she said. “Our Lady seemed to be made all of light,
and her garments were alsq. There sas no border of gold, no
ornamentation.”
“In many books about Fatima, the prayer Our Lady asked you
to say after the decades of the Rosary is given in some such form
as this: ‘O my Jesus, pardon our sins, save us from the fire of
hell, have mercy on the souls in Purgatory, especially the most
abandoned.’ Is that correct?”
“No, it is not,” she replied positively. “The correct form is
the one I have written in my account of the apparition on July 13:'
‘O my Jesus, pardon us, and save us from the fire of hell; draw-
all souls to heaven, especially those in most need.” 1
“Have you ever read the works of Saint Teresa of Avila?” I was thinking especially of the descriptions of uncreated light in the Libro de su vida.
“No. Parts of them were read to us in the refectory.”
“Have you had any revelation from Our Lady about the end
of the world?”
“I cannot answer that question.”
“Some persons believe that Jacinta’s vision of a persecuted Pope
referred to some particular Pontiff. Some believe the present Holy
Father was the one she saw.”
“Jacinta said it was a Pope. There was nothing to indicate any
particular Pope.”
1 "O men Jesus, perdoai-nos e livrai nos do fogo do inferno; levat as almtnhas
todas para o Ceu, prindpalmente aquelas que mats precisarem.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQECGUwSSu-iPjBzIl2n7tdsvAjmypKs6fshwvugbmroG5X9Su8fgecYpZZrmtbG9fNdVAgnN-C3RK1teOgJQeble3nomcZSzk0kAgdHI70LwqwKtlktXXKBNfpmzhQegybKwq19=w491-h810-v0
“Why did you say nothing about the Angel of Peace for so
many years?”
“Nobody told me to. I am under obedience. The priest to whom
I mentioned it at the time told me not to speak of it again. I
never did until the Bishop told me to write everything down.”
She explained the different effects of the apparitions of the
Angel and of Our Lady in terms very similar to those she had
used in her memoirs. She seemed very fond of such words as
“intimo” and “intenso.” Her recollections were clear and precise.
“The Angel left us feeling exhausted, helpless, overpowered, and
we remained lost to everything for hours. Our Lady always made
us feel light and joyous.”
Finally we came to the important subject of the second July
secret, of which so many different and conflicting versions have
been published. Lucia made it plain that Our Lady did not ask
for the consecration of the world to her Immaculate Heart. What
she demanded specifically was the consecration of Russia. She did
not comment, of course, on the fact that Pope Pius XII had
consecrated the world, not Russia, to the Irrfmaculate Heart in
1942. But she said more than once, and with deliberate emphasis:
“What Our Lady wants is that the Pope and all the bishops
in the world shall consecrate Russia to her Immaculate Heart on
one special day. If this is done, she will convert Russia and there
will be peace. If it is not done, the errors of Russia will spread
through every country in the world.”
“Does this mean, in your opinion, that every country, without
exception, will be overcome by Communism?”
“Yes.”
It was plain that she felt that Our Lady’s wishes had not yet
been carried out. People must say the Rosary, perform sacrifices,
make the five first Saturday Communions, pray for the Holy
Father.
“Did Our Lady ever say anything to you about the United
States of America?”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFkZF8rZRWe_3dkHSqsvKimXsO6ZN-gJdh_TdZnVArCeVORRL5DfjADe3ZgPFXDEu2WRePQPXMjPRQ9E7vhyYjA260b_Naoez1j2i7uCWBGVGKvh8TSJ8NzFMUea6mH1D-xXyTf=w491-h810-v0
She gave me a rather startled glance^and then smiled in faint
amusement, as if to suggest that perhaps the United States was
not so important in the general scheme of things as I imagined.
“No,” she said gently. “She never did. But I wish you would
have Masses said for me in the United States!” I promised, and
she said she would pray for me.
It was almost eight o’clock, and we had been talking for about
three hours. Mother Pignatelli, who had been present at the
interview, with Father Galamba, Father Rocha, Father Furtado
and Mr. Daniel Sullivan, gave us all some lemonade and cakes.
She and Sister Maria das Dores followed us to the porch. A black
cat was sleeping there in the last warmth of the departing sun.
The fragrance of roses and gardenias came down from one of the
six beautiful gardens of the convent. As we took our leave.
Sister Maria das Dores, who had entered that house as Lucia
Abobora, leaned over the railing and gave us a charming smile
of farewell.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFg8bUuVo-54yil60jRHZ-DAp1MyOAQ4atbKomC7TxcnblvmpnZXDLEXbaIc9sDjT9GJ-TyNPdBfXvvilXMvJBSiczVbHVlTh6Mf-B2trmr-5grZxuvOyHbe-1pxih5dU2LArm4-g=w491-h810-v0
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHTmLzXFm3ap6zMtLq2GG00tAHpgcYlB5k7aA79a6i04IbfSTgS5zY-qQzbbXh3HFKJJ7GNf_goTQ2KNVKb8WV-acTzdryTPmhVuNsmK9Fo0cMGtpyygsl96yFBWRX2hSsWct1Z6A=w491-h810-v0
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG3WB1M6us6rQfN9q8E3mlAXpppXdYkmmI4_TmaOFP47Z-TUtQ1rSBwgrGn8Wk4qg1wXfhOOE15cskhr5GuWDLG4Jqbtr5mM3954MOqKXNMbzgXped5YixxjNNcn45jGr5JO20KuQ=w491-h810-v0
Date Due
JAN 1 8 51 C£T 1 8 ^
FEB Z » ’5t| OCT 2 7 W
ft® t It ’?,!• mV k ■
1 2Trt| JUN 2 2 ’59
JUN 1 - *51) FEB 1 3’60
n-n 1 0 ’51' AS>R 1 3‘80
JAN 1 8 ’52
FlD 7 ’52
MAR 3 0 52 OC 2 7'68
JAN 27-Si , JAN 2 9 ’54 1
¥£® 18 14
JUN 6 ’55i
:
MAY 8 »gg
SEC 1 8 ^
JAN 3 1 -57
f)
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEPELoHJK932X1E4Tr-ZR93Bzhvdi1yUrOL9g94_QTePXa090jEJfOULMlkIOFql5qndrpFf8fhyZiSFN_8OcxNsdL13QEGySTynAxOs0OfloONSqNcBMU1GYT50-qVZ19vJSLQ=w491-h810-v0
1T57 Q004313S
231.73 WI63