3. On Being and Essence 
(1252-6) 


This little treatise, whose composition is thought to be contemporary with 
the preceding, is an indisputable proof of the genius of its author. Here 
some of the most vexing questions of metaphysics are handled with an ease 
and authority that amazes. An original work? Thomas saw himself as an 
inheritor and continuer of a tradition, but his mastery of that tradition 
enables him to see what others had not seen, or seen as clearly as he. 


The immediate scope of this treatise is the nature of the things that are, 
but it also brilliantly provides a statement of a common doctrine underlying 
the metaphysical efforts of Greeks and Arabs, Christians and Jews, 
Aristotelians and Neoplatonists — a doctrine that Thomas fundamentally 
saw as the teaching of Aristotle. 


This is a philosophical work which, on philosophical grounds, assumes 
that the realm of being is not limited to the things before our eyes. To ask 
about being, then, and what it is to be a being, and of the difference 
between ‘whatness’ and existence, is to open questions that move from the 
things of this world to God and to that great realm of beings between, what 
the Neoplatonists called ‘Intelligences’. Thomas calls them that here too, no 
doubt a quite deliberate choice on the part of a man who came to be called 
the Angelic Doctor, not least because of his insatiable interest in those 
choirs and kinds of ‘separated substances’ the Christian calls the angels. 


PROLOGUE 


Because a small error at the outset ends by being great, according to the 
Philosopher in On the Heavens 1,* and because being and essence are what 
intellect first conceives, as Avicenna says in the beginning of his 
Metaphysics, therefore, lest ignorance of them give occasion for error, and 
in order to lay open the difficulty concerning them, it should be said what 


‘essence’ and ‘being’ mean, how they are found in different things, and how 
they are related to logical intentions, namely, genus, species and difference. 


We ought to derive knowledge of simple things from composite things, 
and come to the primary from the secondary. Since learning most fittingly 
comes about when we begin with easier matters, we should move from the 
meaning of ‘being’ to the meaning of ‘essence’. 


CHAPTER 1 
ON THE MEANINGS OF‘BEING’ AND‘ESSENCE’ 


Notice therefore that, as the Philosopher says in Metaphysics 5, being as 
such is said in two ways: first as it is divided into the ten genera, and second 
as meaning the truth of propositions. These differ because anything can be 
called being in the second sense if an affirmative proposition can be formed 
of it, even if it posits nothing in reality: thus privations and negations are 
called beings, as when we say that affirmation is opposed to negation, and 
that blindness exists in the eye. But in the first sense only that which posits 
something in reality can be called being; therefore, blindness and the like 
are not beings in this sense of the term. 


The term essence does not apply to being in the second sense, for some 
things are called beings which have no essence, as is obvious in the case of 
privations; but essence does apply to being taken in the first sense. Hence 
the Commentator? says that being in the first sense signifies the essence of 
the thing. And because, as has been said, being in this sense is divided into 
ten genera, essence must mean something common to all natures thanks to 
which beings are placed in the different genera and species, such that 
humanity is man’s essence, and similarly with other things. 


Since that by which a thing is constituted in its proper genus or species is 
what is signified by the definition expressing what the thing is, it can be 
seen why philosophers changed the name essence to the name whatness, 
and this is what the Philosopher frequently calls that-which-it-was-to-be — 
namely, that through which a thing is some thing. It is also called form, 
insofar as form signifies the certainty of anything whatsoever, as Avicenna 
says in book 2 of his Metaphysics. And it is signified by yet another name, 
nature, taking nature in the first of the four senses that Boethius gives the 


term in his On the Two Natures [of Christ] — namely, anything the intellect 
can in any way grasp is called a nature because a thing is only intelligible 
through its definition and essence. The Philosopher too says in Metaphysics 
5: that every substance is a nature. However, the term nature taken in this 
sense seems to signify the essence of a thing insofar as it is ordered to the 
thing’s proper activity, and nothing is without a proper activity. The name 
quiddity however is taken from what is signified by the definition. But 
essence means that through which and in which the thing has existence. 


Just as being is said absolutely of substances, but only in a secondary, 
qualified sense of accidental qualities, the same too is true of essence. Some 
substances are simple and others complex. Essence is found in both, 
although more truly and nobly in the simple, which are the causes of the 
complex — at least the first simple substance, God, is. But because the 
essences of such substances are largely hidden from us, we must begin with 
the essences of complex substances, so that we might fittingly learn from 
more accessible concepts. 


CHAPTER 2 
ESSENCE IN COMPOSITE SUBSTANCES 


In complex substances there are form and matter, as in man there are soul 
and body. Neither of these alone can be called essence. Plainly, matter alone 
is not essence, because a thing is knowable and also placed in a species and 
genus through its essence, but matter is neither a principle of knowledge nor 
that according to which something is characterized as to genus and species: 
that has to be what makes the thing actual. Nor can form alone be called the 
essence of complex substance, though some have sought to maintain this. It 
is clear from what has been said that the definition of a thing signifies its 
essence, but the definition of natural substance contains both form and 
matter, otherwise natural and mathematical definitions would not differ. Nor 
can it be said that matter enters into the definition of the natural substance 
as something added to its essence, or as outside its essence — that mode of 
definition is peculiar to the accidental, which, having no complete essence, 
requires that its subject, which is outside its genus, be put into its definition. 
Clearly essence comprises both matter and form. 


Nor can it be said that essence signifies some relation between matter and 
form, or something superadded to them, since this would necessarily be an 
accidental quality extraneous to the thing, and the thing could not be known 
by means of it, as it is by its essence. It is through form, which is the act of 
matter, that matter is made an actual being and made to be a kind of thing. 
Therefore, whatever more is added, does not make matter actually to be 
simply speaking, but only actually to be such-and-such, which is what 
accidental qualities do: whiteness makes something to be actually white. 
That is why when such a form is acquired, a thing is not said to be 
generated simply speaking but only in a certain respect. 


We are left, then, with this, that the word essence in the case of complex 
substances signifies what is composed of matter and form. This agrees with 
Boethius in his commentary on the Categories, where he says that ousia 
signifies the complex: ousia means for the Greeks what essence means for 
us, as he himself points out in On the Two Natures. Avicenna too says that 
the quiddity of complex substance is the very composition of form and 
matter. And the Commentator also says, with reference to Metaphysics 7. 
“The nature had by the species of generable things is something in between, 
that is, composed of matter and form.’ 


This stands to reason, since the existence of the compound substance is 
not of form alone nor of matter alone but of the composed thing itself; and 
the essence is that according to which a thing is said to exist. Necessarily 
then the essence whereby a thing is denominated a being cannot be form 
alone, nor matter alone, but is both, even though in a way only form is the 
cause of such existence. We see that other things constituted from several 
principles are not denominated from one of the principles alone but from 
that which comprises both. This is clear in tastes, because sweetness is 
caused by the heat which digests the moist, but something is not 
denominated sweet from heat but from taste which comprises the hot and 
the humid. 


It might perhaps seem to follow from the fact that matter is the principle 
of individuation that essence cannot be defined universally, since it contains 
matter as well as form — particular matter, that is, not universal — and 
essence is what the definition signifies. But note that it is not matter 
understood in just any way that is the principle of individuation, but only 
designated matter: and I call designated matter that which is considered 
under determinate dimensions. Matter in this sense is not put into the 


definition of man as man but would be put into the definition of Socrates if 
Socrates had an essence. Non-designated matter is included in the definition 
of man, for it is not this bone and this flesh that are put into the definition of 
man, but bone and flesh as such which are the non-designated matter of 
man. 


It is evident that the essence of man differs from the essence of Socrates 
only as the designated differs from the non-designated. Hence the 
Commentator says on Metaphysics 7, ‘Socrates is nothing else than 
animality and rationality, which are his quiddity.’ So too the essence of 
genus differs from that of species according to the designated and non- 
designated, though there is a different mode of designation than in the 
previous case, because the designation of the individual with reference to 
species is by matter with determinate dimensions, whereas the designation 
of species with respect to genus is by the constitutive difference taken from 
the form of the thing. The determination or designation in the species with 
reference to genus is not by way of something existing only in the essence 
of the species and not in the essence of the genus; indeed, whatever is in the 
species is also in the genus in an undetermined way. For if animal were not 
the whole that is man, but only its part, it would not be predicated of it, 
since no integral part is predicated of its whole. To see why this is so, 
consider that the difference between body as a part of animal and body as a 
genus is that body as a genus cannot be an integral part. 


This term body has many meanings. In the genus of substance, body 
means that which has a nature such that three dimensions can be designated 
in it. Those three designated dimensions are body as it falls in the genus of 
quantity. For something that already has one perfection can receive another, 
as is evident in man who in addition to sensitive nature has intellectual 
nature. Similarly too, over and above the perfection of having a nature in 
which three dimensions can be designated, another perfection can be added, 
such as life and the like. The term body, then, can signify a thing whose 
form permits three dimensions to be designated in it but with precision, 
such that no further perfection follows from that form. If something were 
added, it would be outside the meaning of body in this sense. In this sense, 
body is an integral and material part of animal and soul is not included in its 
meaning but supervenes on it and from the two, body and soul, the animal 
is constituted as from its parts. 


The term body can also be taken to signify something whose form 
permits three dimensions to be designated in it, whatever form that might be 
and whether or not any further perfection can come from it. In this sense, 
body is the genus of animal, because nothing should be understood in 
animal which is not implicitly contained in its genus body. For the soul is 
not a form other than the form thanks to which three dimensions can be 
designated in the thing. Therefore when it was said that ‘body is that which 
has such a form that three dimensions can be designated in it’, whatever 
form it has is understood, whether soul, or rock, or whatever. The animal’s 
form is implicitly contained in the form of body, insofar as body is its 
genus. 


This is also the way animal relates to man. For if animal meant only 
something whose perfection enables it to sense and be moved by an internal 
principle, prescinding from other perfections, then whatever other 
perfection supervened would relate to animal as a co-part and not as 
implicitly contained in the notion of animal. Animal would not be a genus. 
As a genus it signifies something from whose form sense and motion can 
flow, whatever that form might be, whether it is sensible soul alone or both 
sensible and rational. 


Thus genus signifies indeterminately everything that is in the species and 
not just matter alone. Difference signifies the whole and not form alone and 
the definition too signifies the whole species — but differently. For genus 
signifies the whole by determining what is material in the thing without the 
determination of its proper form; genus is taken from the matter although it 
is not matter. This is clear because body means that which has a perfection 
such that three dimensions can be designated in it, which perfection is 
related materially to any further perfection. Difference on the other hand is 
a denomination drawn from the determined form without any determinate 
matter being mentioned. Take the case of a thing being called animate, 
namely, that which has a soul; this does not tell us whether it is a body or 
something else. Hence Avicenna says that genus is not understood in 
difference as part of its essence, but only as being outside essence, as the 
subject is in the understanding of properties. Therefore the genus is not 
predicated as such of difference, the Philosopher says in Metaphysics 3 and 
Topics 4, but in the way that a subject is predicated of its property. The 
definition or species comprises both, namely the determinate matter that the 


genus term signifies and the determinate form that the difference term 
signifies. 

From this it is clear why genus, species and difference relate 
proportionally to matter, form and the natural compound, although they are 
not the same as them, because the genus is not matter, but drawn from 
matter as signifying the whole, nor difference form, but drawn from form as 
signifying the whole. That is why we say that man is rational animal, and 
not from animal and from rational as we say he is from soul and body: for 
man is said to be from soul and body as a third thing constituted from two 
things neither of which he is, for a man is not soul nor is he body. But if 
man is said in some way to be constituted of animal and rational, it will not 
be as a third thing constituted of two things, but as a third concept 
composed of two concepts. For animal is conceived without the 
determination of any special form and expresses the nature of the thing by 
means of that which is material with respect to its ultimate perfection. The 
concept of the difference ‘rational’ consists in the determination of special 
form: from these two concepts is constituted the concept of species or 
definition. Therefore just as the constituents of a thing are not predicated of 
it, neither are the constituent concepts predicated of the complex concept, 
for we do not say that the definition is the genus or the difference. 


However although genus signifies the whole essence of species, it is not 
necessary that there be the same essence of different species of the same 
genus. The unity of genus stems from this very indetermination or 
indifference. But what is signified by genus is not numerically the same in 
the different species, in which something else supervenes — namely, the 
difference which determines it; in much the same way numerically one 
form determines matter. But because genus signifies some form — though 
not determinately this one or that — it is the same form that difference 
determinately expresses and that the genus indeterminately signifies. As the 
Commentator says in Metaphysics 11, prime matter is called one by the 
removal of all forms, but genus is called one by the comprehensive 
universality of the form signified. Thus it is clear that the addition of 
difference removes the indetermination that was the cause of the unity of 
genus and there come into view species essentially different. 

We have said that the nature of species is undetermined with respect to 
the individual just as genus is undetermined with respect to its species. 
When the genus is predicated of species it implies in its signification, 


though indistinctly, everything that is determinately in the species. So too 
species as predicated of the individual signifies all that is essential in the 
individual, though indistinctly. In this way the essence of species is 
signified by the name man, and man is predicated of Socrates. However if 
the nature of species were signified as prescinding from designated matter, 
which is the principle of individuation, then it is to take it as a part and it is 
signified by the name humanity; humanity signifies that whereby man is 
man. Designated matter is not that thanks to which man is man, and thus is 
not among the things whereby man is man. Clearly then, designated matter 
is excluded from or prescinded from in its signification. It is because the 
part is not predicated of the whole that humanity is not predicated of man or 
of Socrates. Avicenna says that the quiddity of the composed thing is not 
the compound of which it is the quiddity, although the quiddity itself is 
composed: humanity, though it is complex, is not man. Indeed, it must be 
received in something which is designated matter. 


Because, as has been said, the designation of species with respect to 
genus is through form, and the designation of the individual with respect to 
species is through matter, it is necessary that the name signifying that 
whence the nature of genus is taken, prescinding from the determinate form 
perfecting species, signify a material part of the whole, as body is a material 
part of man; but the name signifying that whence the nature of species is 
drawn, prescinding from designated matter, signifies a formal part. 
Humanity therefore is signified as a form and is called the form of the 
whole, not as superadded to the essential parts, namely form and matter, in 
the way the form of house is superadded to its integral parts, but rather as 
the form which is the whole, namely a form comprising matter as well, 
although with precision from those things by which matter is designated. 


Clearly then the terms ‘man’ and ‘humanity’ signify the essence of man, 
though differently, as has been said. ‘Man’ signifies it as a whole because it 
does not prescind from the designation of matter but implicitly and 
indistinctly contains it, much as the genus is said to contain the difference, 
which is why the term man is predicated of individuals. But ‘humanity’ 
signifies the essence as a part, because it contains in its signification only 
what is proper to man as man, and prescinds from every other designation: 
which is why it is not predicated of individual men. Because of this, the 
term ‘essence’ is sometimes predicated of a thing, as when we say that 


Socrates is a certain essence, but sometimes this is denied, as when we say 
that the essence of Socrates is not Socrates. 


CHAPTER 3 
ESSENCE AND UNIVERSALITY 


Having examined what the word essence means in complex substances, we 
go on to ask how it relates to the notions of genus and species and 
difference. Because that to which the notions of genus and species and 
difference belong is predicated of this designated singular, it is impossible 
that the notion of universal — namely of genus or of species — should belong 
to the essence as it is signified in the manner of a part, for example, 
humanity or animality. That is why Avicenna said that rationality is not the 
difference but the principle of the difference; for the same reason, humanity 
is not the species nor animality the genus. Nor can it be said that the notion 
of genus or species belongs to essence because it is something existing 
apart from singulars, as the Platonists held. If that were so genus and 
species could not be predicated of the individual; for we cannot say that 
Socrates is something separated from himself or that such a separated thing 
would contribute to knowledge of this singular thing. It remains that the 
notion of genus or species belongs to essence insofar as it is signified in the 
manner of a whole, as by ‘man’ or ‘animal’, which implicitly and 
indistinctly contain everything that is in the individual. 


The nature or essence so taken can be considered in two ways. In the 
most absolute and proper consideration of it: nothing is true of the essence 
except what belongs to it as such; whatever else might be attributed to it 
would be a false attribution. For example, ‘rational’ and ‘animal’ and the 
other qualities which fall under his definition belong to man insofar as he is 
man. White and black and such qualities, which are not part of the concept 
of humanity, do not belong to man as man. Can a nature so considered be 
called one or many? Neither, because both are outside the understanding of 
humanity, yet both can attach to it. For if plurality were of the very 
understanding of a nature, it could never be one, yet it is one in Socrates. 
Similarly if unity were of its notion, then it would be one and the same in 
Socrates and Plato, nor could it be multiplied in many individuals. In 


another way the essence can be considered as it exists in this or that, and 
thus something can be predicated of it per accidens by reason of that in 
which it is, as when man is said to be white because Socrates is white, 
although this does not belong to man insofar as he is man. 


This nature can exist in two ways, however: in one way in singulars and 
in another way in the soul, and in both cases accidental qualities befall the 
nature. In singulars it has multiple existence because of the different 
singulars. None of this pertains to the nature itself in its first or absolute 
consideration. For it is false to say that it pertains to the essence of man as 
such to exist in this singular, for then it would never exist outside this 
singular; similarly if it pertained to man as man not to exist in this singular, 
it would never be in him. But it is true to say that man, although not just as 
man, is such that it is in this singular or that, or in the soul. Therefore the 
nature of man absolutely considered clearly abstracts from any sort of 
existence, but in such a way that it does not prescind from either of them. 
The nature considered absolutely is what is predicated of all individuals. 


It cannot, however, be said that the notion of universality belongs to the 
nature so taken. Unity and community are of the very meaning of the 
universal and neither of these belongs to human nature as it is considered 
absolutely. For if universality were included in the understanding of man, 
then in whatever individual the nature were found, universality would be 
found. This is of course false, because there is no universality in Socrates: 
whatever is in him is individuated. Similarly it cannot be said that the 
notion of genus or species belongs to human nature as it exists in 
individuals. Human nature is not found in individuals as a unit common to 
all, which the meaning of universal requires. It follows that the notion of 
species belongs to human nature as it exists in the intellect. 


Human nature itself exists in the intellect as abstracted from all 
individuating characteristics; therefore it has a uniform notion in all 
individuals outside the soul, because it is equally the similitude of all and 
conducive to the knowledge of each insofar as they are men. Because the 
nature has such a relation to all individuals, the intellect fashions the notion 
of species and attributes it to the nature. Hence the Commentator says at the 
beginning of the De anima that ‘it is intellect that causes universality in 
things’; and Avicenna says the same in his Metaphysics. And although this 
nature as understood has the notion of universality as it compares to things 
outside the soul, because it is the similitude of all, none the less insofar as it 


exists in this intellect or that it is a particular understood species. From this 
appears the defect of the Commentator in De anima 3, who wants to 
conclude from the universality of the form understood to the unity of the 
faculty of understanding in all men. But the universality of the form is not 
its existence in the intellect but only insofar as it refers to things as their 
likeness. If there were one statue representing many men, it is clear that the 
image or likeness of the statue has a singular and proper existence as it is in 
this matter, but it has the notion of community insofar as it is common to 
many things represented. 


It pertains to human nature according to its absolute consideration to be 
predicated of Socrates, although the notion of species does not belong to it 
according to its absolute consideration but is one of the accidents that befall 
it as it exists in intellect. Hence species is not predicated of Socrates, as if 
we Said, ‘Socrates is a species.’ This would necessarily happen if the notion 
of species belonged to man as it exists in Socrates, or according to its 
absolute consideration: whatever belongs to man as man is predicated of 
Socrates insofar as he is a man. 


To be predicated belongs to genus as such, since it is part of its definition. 
For predication is something completed by the action of intellect composing 
and dividing, having as its basis in reality the unity of those things of which 
one is said of another. Hence the notion of predicability can be included in 
the notion of this intention which is the genus, which likewise is completed 
through the act of the intellect. Nevertheless that to which the intellect 
attributes the intention of predicability, joining it with another, is not itself 
the intention of genus, but rather that to which the intellect attributes the 
intention of genus, for example, to what is signified by the word animal. 


Thus it is clear how essence or nature relates to the notion of species. The 
notion of species is not among the things which belong to the nature 
according to its absolute consideration, nor is it among the accidents which 
follow on the existence it has outside the soul, like whiteness and blackness; 
rather, it is among the accidents which follow on it according to the 
existence it has in intellect. It is in this way too that the notions of genus 
and difference belong to it. 


CHAPTER 4 
ESSENCE IN SEPARATED SUBSTANCES 


It remains to be seen now how essence is found in separated substances— 
namely, in the soul, in intelligences and in the first cause. However, 
although everyone concedes the simplicity of the first cause, some seek to 
introduce the composition of form and matter into intelligences and in the 
soul. The author of this position seems to have been Avicebron, in his 
Fountain of Life. But this position conflicts with the common sayings of the 
philosophers, since they say that such substances are separated from matter 
and prove them to be without any matter. The most powerful demonstration 
of this is found in the faculty of understanding. For it is apparent that forms 
are actually intelligible only insofar as they are separated from matter and 
its conditions, and they are made actually intelligible by the power of the 
understanding substance insofar as they are received in it and are acted 
upon by it. Therefore every understanding substance must be wholly 
immune from matter. It has neither a material part nor is it like the material 
forms impressed in matter. 


No one can say that intelligibility is impeded by corporeal matter alone. 
For if that were the case, since matter is called corporeal only insofar as it is 
subject to a corporeal form, it would follow that matter has the 
characteristic of impeding intelligibility from the corporeal form. But this 
cannot be, because the corporeal form itself is actually intelligible, like 
other forms, insofar as it is abstracted from matter. Hence in no way is there 
composition of matter and form in the soul or in the intelligence in such 
wise that essence in them would be understood as it is in corporeal 
substances. 


But there is a composition of form and existence, hence in the comment 
on Proposition 9 of the Book of Causes we read that intelligence has form 
and existence: form meaning there the quiddity itself or the simple nature. 


How this is so is easily seen. Things which are so related that one is the 
cause of the existence of the other are such that the cause can exist without 
the other, and not vice versa. But such is the relation of matter and form that 
form gives existence to matter; therefore it is impossible for matter to be 
without some form, but it is not impossible for there to besome form 
without matter, since form as form does not have dependence on matter. But 
if there are forms that can exist only in matter, this is true of them insofar as 


they are distant from the first principle which is first and pure act. Those 
forms which are closest to the first principle, accordingly, are forms as such, 
subsisting without matter. The entire genus of form does not require matter, 
as has been said; the forms which do not are called intelligences and it is 
not necessary that the essences or quiddities of these substances be anything 
other than form itself. 


The essences of complex and simple substances differ in that the essence 
of the complex is not form alone but is composed of form and matter, 
whereas the essence of simple substance is form alone. Two other 
differences flow from this. One is that the essence of complex substance 
can be signified either as a whole or as a part, which befalls it on account of 
the designation of matter, as has been said. Therefore it is not in just any 
way that the essence of the complex thing is predicated of it, for it cannot 
be said that man is his quiddity. But the essence of the simple thing, which 
is its form, can be signified only as a whole, since there is nothing apart 
from form that might be the recipient of form; that is why the essence of the 
simple substance can be predicated of it. Avicenna said that ‘the quiddity of 
the simple is the simple thing itself’ because there is nothing else receiving 
It. 


The second difference is that the essence of complex things, because it is 
received in designated matter, is multiplied according to its division. Hence 
it happens that some things are specifically the same and numerically 
different. But the essence of the simple is not received in matter, so there 
cannot be any multiplication of it. Nor in such substances do we find many 
individuals of the same species. There are as many species as there are 
individuals, as Avicenna expressly says. 


Although they are forms alone without matter, such substances are not 
utterly simple nor pure act. They have a tinge of potentiality, which is clear 
from this — that whatever does not enter into the understanding of an 
essence or quiddity comes to it from without and is composed with the 
essence. No essence can be understood without the things that are parts of 
the essence. But every essence or quiddity can be understood without its 
existence being understood: for I can understand what a man or phoenix is 
and yet not know whether they exist in reality. Therefore, it is clear that to 
exist is other than the essence or quiddity. Unless of course there is 
something whose quiddity is its very existence. Such a thing is first and 
one, because it is impossible for there to be a multiplication of anything 


except by the addition of some difference, as the nature of genus is 
multiplied into species; either because form is received in diverse matters, 
as the nature of species is multiplied in diverse individuals, or because one 
is absolute and the other received in something, as if there were some 
separated heat it would be other than a non-separated heat by its very 
separation. If, however, there is given a thing which is existence alone, 
subsisting existence itself, this existence would not receive the addition of a 
difference, since it would not then be existence alone but existence along 
with some form. Much less would it receive the addition of matter, since 
then it would not be subsistent but material. Consequently, a thing which is 
its own existence can only be one, and it must be said that in every other 
thing its existence is one thing and its quiddity or nature or form other. In 
intelligences existence must be outside form, and that is why it is said that 
an intelligence is form and existence. 


Whatever belongs to a thing is either caused by the principles of its 
nature, for example, risible in man; or comes to it from some extrinsic 
principle, as light to air from the influence of the sun. Existence cannot be 
caused by the form or quiddity of a thing — I mean as an efficient cause — 
because in this way a thing would be a cause of itself and produce itself in 
existence, which is impossible. Therefore it is necessary that each thing 
whose existence is other than its nature has its existence from another. And 
because whatever is from another is reduced to what is per se as to its first 
cause, there must be some thing which is the cause of the being of all things 
by the fact that it is existence alone, otherwise there would be an infinite 
regress in causes, since everything which is not existence alone has a cause 
of its existence, as has been said. It is evident then that an intelligence is 
form and existence, and that it has existence from the first being who is 
existence alone, and that this is the first cause, God. 


If each thing which receives something from another is in potency to it, 
and what is received in it is its act, the quiddity or form that is the 
intelligence is in potency to the existence it receives from God, and that 
received existence is in the mode of an act. Thus potency and act are found 
in intelligences, but not form and matter except equivocally. To suffer, to 
receive, to be a subject, and all such qualities as are found in things by 
reason of matter, belong equivocally to intellectual substances and 
corporeal substances, as the Commentator says in De anima 3. And because 
the quiddity of intelligence is the intelligence itself, its quiddity or essence 


is identical with it and the existence it received from God is that whereby it 
subsists among the things that are. Because of this some say that such 
substances are composed of that whereby and that which, or, as Boethius 
says, from what is and existence. 


Since potency and act are found in intelligences, it is possible to find a 
multitude of intelligences, as it would not be if there were no potency in 
them. Hence the Commentator says in De anima 3 that if the nature of the 
possible intellect were unknown, we would be unable to find a multitude in 
separated substances. Therefore the intelligences differ from one another on 
the basis of grade of potency and act, such that the higher intelligence, 
which is closer to the First Being, has more act and less potency, and so on 
accordingly with the others. 


The human soul is the lowest level of intellectual substance and its 
possible intellect relates to intelligible forms as prime matter — which is the 
bottom of the scale of sensible being — relates to sensible forms, as the 
Commentator says in De anima 3. The Philosopher compares it to a tablet 
on which nothing has been written. Because it has more of potency than 
other intellectual substances, making it close to material things that they 
might be drawn to participate in its existence. The composition of soul and 
body results in one existent composite, although that existence as it pertains 
to soul does not depend on body. Therefore, after the soul come other forms 
which have more of potency and are closer to matter and which cannot exist 
apart from matter. Among them there are rank and order extending to the 
first forms of the elements which are closest to matter; hence the only 
operation they have follows on the demand of active and passive qualities 
and of other things which dispose matter for form. 


CHAPTER 5 
DIFFERENT BEINGS, DIFFERENT ESSENCES 


In the light of the above it is clear how essence is found in different things. 
Essence relates to substance in three ways. First there is the one who is 
God, whose essence is his very existence. Indeed, because his essence is not 
different from his existence, some philosophers maintain that God has no 
quiddity or essence. It follows from this that he is not in a genus, because 


whatever is in a genus must have a quiddity different from its existence, 
since the quiddity or nature of the genus and species do not differ in their 
definitions in the things whose genera and species they are, although they 
have diverse existence in each. 


Though we say that God is existence alone, we ought not to fall into the 
error of those who say that God is that universal existence whereby each 
thing formally is. A characteristic of the existence of God is that nothing 
can be added to it, hence it is distinct from every other existence by its own 
purity. That is why in the comment on Proposition 9 of the Book of Causes 
it is said that the individuation of the first cause, which is existence alone, is 
through its pure goodness. Common existence, however, is understood as 
neither including nor excluding addition since that would rule out the 
possibility of understanding it as in a being which is something besides 
existence. 


Similarly too, although He is existence alone, He does not lack any other 
perfections and worthy properties. Indeed, He has all the perfections which 
are in all genera, thanks to which He is called simply perfect, as both the 
Philosopher and the Commentator say in Metaphysics 5, but He has them in 
a more excellent way than other things: in Him they are one, in others 
diverse. This is because all these perfections belong to Him according to 
His simple existence. If something through one quality could perform the 
activities of all qualities, it would have all qualities in its one quality. That 
is how God has all perfections in His existence. 


In a second way, essence is found in created intelligences whose essence 
and existence differ, though their essence is without matter. Hence their 
existence is not absolute, but received, therefore finite and limited to the 
capacity of the receiving nature. Their nature or quiddity is absolute, not 
being received in any matter. Hence it is said in the Book of Causes that 
intelligences are infinite with reference to things below and finite with 
reference to what is above, for they are finite with respect to their existence, 
which they receive from above, but they are not limited downward because 
their forms are not limited to the capacity of any matter receiving them. As 
has been said, a plurality of individuals of one species is not found in such 
substances, except in the case of the human soul, and this because of the 
body with which it is united. And though its individuation depends on body 
opportunely by way of its beginning, since it only comes to be individuated 
in the body of which it is the act, it does not follow that its individuation 


perishes when body is subtracted. Its absolute existence is individuated by 
being made the form of this body, but that existence remains individuated 
for ever. Therefore Avicenna says that the individuation and multiplication 
of souls depend on body with respect to its beginning but not with respect 
to its end. 


Because quiddity is not the same as existence in these substances, they 
can be placed in a category and genus and species and difference are found 
in them, although their proper differences are hidden from us. The essential 
differences of sensible things are also hidden from us, so they are signified 
through accidental differences which take their rise from the essential, as a 
cause is signified by its effect; for example, when biped is given as man’s 
difference. The proper accidents of immaterial substances are unknown to 
us so we cannot signify their differences either by essential or accidental 
differences. 


Note too that genus and difference cannot be taken in the same way in 
these two kinds of substances, because in sensible substance genus is taken 
from that which is material in the thing and difference from that which is 
formal in it. Hence Avicenna says at the beginning of his On the Soul that in 
things composed of matter and form ‘their simple difference is constituted 
from it’, that is, from the form. Form itself is not the difference, but the 
principle of the difference, as he says in his Metaphysics. Such a difference 
is called the simple difference because it is taken from that which is part of 
the thing’s quiddity, namely its form. However, since immaterial substances 
are simple quiddities, in them the difference cannot be taken from a part of, 
but only from the whole of, quiddity. Therefore, at the beginning of On the 
Soul, Avicenna says that ‘only things composed of matter and form have a 
simple difference’. 


So too in them the genus is drawn from the whole essence, but in a 
different way. For one separated substance is like another in immateriality, 
but they differ from one another in grade of perfection according to distance 
from potentiality and closeness to pure act. In them genus is drawn from 
what follows on their being immaterial, such as intellectuality or the like, 
whereas difference is drawn from that which follows on grade of perfection, 
which however is unknown to us. Nor need these differences be accidental 
because they are according to greater or lesser perfection, which do not 
diversify species: the grade of perfection in receiving the same form does 
not diversify species — the more or less white share in the same nature of 


whiteness — but the diverse grades of perfection in these participated forms 
or natures diversify species, as nature proceeds through grades from plant to 
animal through things which are intermediate between plant and animal, 
according to the Philosopher in On the History of Animals 8.1. Again, it is 
not necessary that the distinction between intellectual substances always be 
through two true differences, since this cannot happen with anything, as the 
Philosopher says in On the Parts of Animals 1.2. 


In a third way essence is found in substances composed of matter and 
form, in which existence is received and limited because they receive 
existence from another and furthermore their nature or quiddity is received 
in designated matter. Therefore they are finite both upward and downward, 
and in them there can be a multiplication of individuals of the same species 
because of the division of designated matter. How essence relates to logical 
intentions in them has already been discussed. 


CHAPTER 6 
ESSENCE AND ACCIDENTS 


Having discussed how it is found in all the kinds of substance, it remains to 
be seen how essence is found in accidents. Because, as has been said, 
essence is that which is signified by the definition, accidents will have 
essence in the same way that they can be defined. But they have an 
incomplete definition, because they can be defined only by putting their 
subject into the definition. This is so because they do not exist themselves 
apart from the subject. But just as substantial existence results from form 
and matter when they are composed, so accidental existence results when 
the accident advenes to the subject. Neither substantial form nor matter has 
a complete essence, because in the definition of substantial form that of 
which it is the form must be put, and thus its definition is by way of an 
addition of something outside it, as is the case with the definition of 
accidental form. For example, the natural philosopher who considers soul 
only insofar as it is a form of physical body puts body in the definition of 
soul. 


Substantial form and accidental form differ. Substantial form does not 
have absolute existence in itself apart from the thing that it informs, nor 


does the matter to which it advenes. This is why from the conjunction of the 
two an existence in which a thing subsists in itself results, and something 
per se one is brought about as well as a certain essence. Hence form, 
although considered in itself it does not have the complete notion of the 
essence, is none the less part of the complete essence. 


That to which the accident advenes is a being complete in itself, already 
subsisting in its own existence, and this existence naturally precedes the 
accident that comes to it. Therefore the supervenient accident accident — the 
conjunction of itself with that to which it advenes — is not the cause of the 
existence in which the thing subsists and by which the thing is of itself a 
being. Rather, it causes a secondary existence without which the subsistent 
thing can be understood to exist, as the first can be understood without the 
second. Thus, what is brought about by the composition of accident and 
subject is accidentally rather than per se one. Thus the accident neither has 
the notion of a complete essence nor is it a part of a complete essence, but it 
is essence in a certain respect just as it is a being in a certain respect. 


Because what is especially and most truly in any genus is the cause of the 
other things in that genus — fire, which is the limit of heat, is the cause of 
heat in warm things, as is said in Metaphysics 2 — so substance, which is 
first in the genus of being as especially and most truly having essence, must 
be the cause of accidents, which secondarily and as it were in a certain 
respect participate in the notion of being. Which occurs variously. For since 
the parts of substance are matter and form, some accidents chiefly follow on 
form and others on matter. There is a form whose existence does not depend 
on matter, namely, the intellectual soul; but matter exists only through form. 
Hence in the accidents which follow on form there are some that do not 
share in matter, for example thinking, which is not by means of a bodily 
organ, as the Philosopher proves in On the Soul 3, and others that do share 
in matter, for example sensing. But there is no accident following on matter 
that does not share in matter. 


A certain diversity is found among the accidents which follow on matter. 
For some accidents follow on matter according to an ordering they have to a 
special form, such as masculine and feminine in animals, a diversity 
reducible to matter, as is said in Metaphysics 10. Hence, the form of animal 
being taken away, such accidents remain only equivocally. Others follow on 
matter according to an ordering to a general form, and these remain when 


the special form is taken away, as black pigment is in the Ethiopian from a 
mixture of elements and not by reason of soul, and therefore after death it 
remains. 


Because a thing is individuated by matter and placed in a genus or 
species because of its form, the accidents which follow on matter are 
accidents of the individual, according to which members of the same 
species differ among themselves. The accidents which follow on form are 
properties of either genus or species and thus are found in everything which 
shares in the nature of the genus or species, as risible follows on man’s 
form, since laughter is occasioned by some awareness in man’s soul. 


It should also be noted that accidents in full actuality are sometimes caused 
by the essential principles, like the heat in fire which is always hot, but 
sometimes only in aptitude such that they are completed by an external 
agent, as the diaphaneity of air is completed by the external luminous body. 
In the latter, the aptitude is an inseparable accident, but the completion that 
comes from a principle outside the essence of the thing, or which does not 
enter into the constitution of the thing, is separable, for example to be 
moved and the like. 


It should further be noted that genus, difference and species are 
understood in accidents differently than they are in substances. From the 
coming together of substantial form and matter something in itself one 
results which is properly placed in the category of substance. In substances 
concrete names which signify the composite are properly said to be in a 
species or genus, for example, man or animal. Neither form nor matter is in 
a category in this way, save by way of reduction, as principles are said to be 
in a genus. Nothing in itself one comes to be from accident and subject; 
hence from their conjunction no nature results to which the intention of 
genus or species could be attributed. Hence accidental terms expressed 
concretely, like white or musical, are not put into a category as species or 
genera except by reduction, but only as abstractly expressed, like whiteness 
and music. And since accidents are not composed of matter and form, in 
them genus cannot be taken from matter or difference from form as they are 
in composed substances. Genus must first be taken from their very mode of 
being, insofar as being is said diversely, according to prior and posterior, of 
the ten genera of category. Thus the definition of quantity is that it is the 


measure of substance and quality that it is a disposition of substance, and so 
with the rest, according to the Philosopher in Metaphysics 9. 


Differences in them are taken from the diversity of principles from which 
they are caused. And because properties are caused by the proper principles 
of the subject, the subject is put in their definition in the place of difference, 
if they are abstractly defined — which is how they are properly in a genus — 
for example, snubness is defined as the curvature of the nose. It is otherwise 
when they are defined as concretely expressed, for then the subject is put 
into the definition as the genus, because they would then be defined after 
the manner of composed substances in which the notion of genus is drawn 
from matter, for example we say that snub is a curved nose. It is similar 
when one accident is the principle of another, as action and passion and 
quantity are principles of relation, and thus it is with reference to these that 
the Philosopher subdivides relation in Metaphysics 5. However, because the 
proper principles of accidents are not always manifest, sometimes we take 
the differences of accidents from their effects, such as dispersion or 
concentration produces differences of colour, insofar as there is an 
abundance or paucity of light, from which the different species of colour are 
caused. 


Thus it is clear how essence is found in substance and accident and in 
complex and simple substance, and how in all these the intentions of 
universality are logically found — except the First, in whom there is full 
simplicity and to whom neither the notion of genus and species nor 
consequently definition belongs because of His simplicity. And that is the 
end and completion of this discourse. Amen. 