The reign of Christ, the immortal king of ages

      The reign of Christ, the immortal king of ages

          Notice

Notice

    This book was produced in EPUB format by the Internet Archive. The book pages were scanned and converted to EPUB format automatically. This process relies on optical character recognition, and is somewhat susceptible to errors. The book may not offer the correct reading sequence, and there may be weird characters, non-words, and incorrect guesses at structure. Some page numbers and headers or footers may remain from the scanned page. The process which identifies images might have found stray marks on the page which are not actually images from the book. The hidden page numbering which may be available to your ereader corresponds to the numbered pages in the print edition, but is not an exact match;  page numbers will increment at the same rate as the corresponding print edition, but we may have started numbering before the print book's visible page numbers.  The Internet Archive is working to improve the scanning process and resulting books, but in the meantime, we hope that this book will be useful to you. The Internet Archive was founded in 1996 to build an Internet library and to promote universal access to all knowledge. The Archive's purposes include offering permanent access for researchers, historians, scholars, people with disabilities, and the general public to historical collections that exist in digital format. The Internet Archive includes texts, audio, moving images, and software as well as archived web pages, and provides specialized services for information access for the blind and other persons with disabilities.Created with hocr-to-epub (v.1.0.0)

Page 1

    The text on this page is estimated to be only 13.00% accurate
    eee

Page 2

    The text on this page is estimated to be only 27.29% accurate
    J meh ina aies ite . Set Yh’, iy ah 9 ORF ey hp gen Vek Poet,

Page 3

Page 4

    The text on this page is estimated to be only 7.50% accurate
    . *

Page 5

Page 6

Page 7

Page 8

    LORD OF LORDS AND KING OF KINGS Adapted f 

Page 9

    THE REIGN OF CHRIST THE IMMORTAL KING OF AGES BY Rev. JOSEPH HUSSLEIN, S.J. FORDHAM UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF SOCIOLOGY AND SOCIAL SERVICE AUTHOR: ‘“THE WORLD PROBLEM,’’ ‘‘DEMOCRATIC INDUSTRY,” ‘*EVOLUTION AND SOCIAL PROGRESS,’” ‘‘THE LITTLE FLOWER AND THE BLESSED SACRAMENT,” ETC. BT 201 H85 1928 glas Husslein, Joseph Casper, 1873The reign of Christ : the immortal Computer ID: 53570 NEW YORK P. J. KENEDY & SONS 1928 OrNnkR Ohi} & 8506

Page 10

    Jmprimi Potest: Epwarp C. PHILLIPs, s.J. Praepositus, Prov. Marylandiae-Neo Eboracensis Rihil Cbstat: ArtTHur J. SCANLAN, S.T.D. Censor Librorum Hmprimatur: bq Patrick Carpinat Hayes Archbishop, New York New York, October 18, 1928. CopyricHT, 1928, BY P. J. KENEDY & SONS New York PRINTED IN THE Unrrep STATES OF AMERICA

Page 11

    PRESS ONWARD TO THE 2 ENNING” ‘THE WORLD FOR HIM

Page 12

Page 13

    FOREWORD O aid in the promotion of the Reign of Chris throughout the world is the aim of this book. It is a graphic and practical development of the vital thoughts contained in the great Encyclicals dealing with the Universal Sovereignty of Christ the King. These thoughts are of more than passing interest. They are meant to be of permanent and supreme importance in the life of the Church, and to have a profound influence on the future course of history. The volume is planned to be of general service to all the Faithful, since the express desire of the Holy See is that everyone, without exception, be familiarized so thoroughly with the thoughts here set forth that they must exercise a lasting influence over the lives of all. Priests and Religious, it is hoped, will draw help and inspiration from it, especially those who have the obligation of annually instructing the people on this urgent theme. Appealing to the Hierarchy of the Catholic world, Pope Pius XI solemnly exhorted them “to see that on Stated days before the annual celebration of the Feast of Christ the King, sermons be preached to the people in Vv

Page 14

    vi er FOREWORD every parish, informing and inStruéting them accurately on the nature, manner and importance of the subje¢t, so that they may arrange and conform their lives in such a manner as to be worthy of giving faithful and zealous tribute to the Empire of the Divine King.” The Universal Sovereignty of Christ the King, always acknowledged within the Church, was officially proclaimed in the Encyclical Annum Sacrum of Pope Leo XIII, who first consecrated all mankind—Catholic, Protestant, Jew and Infidel—to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. “His Empire,” he wrote, “extends not only over Catholic peoples, and over those who, reborn in the font of Baptism, belong by right to the Church even though error has driven them far and dissension has separated them from the bond of love; it embraces even those who do not enjoy the Christian Faith, so that all mankind is most truly under the power of Jesus Christ.” The same thought was confirmed and set forth more fully in the Encyclical Quas Primas of Pope Pius XI on the Establishment of the Feast of Christ the King, on which Feast also the Act of Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart of Jesus is prescribed to take place annually. Again, this thought was supplemented in the Encyclical Miserentissimus Redemptor, by the same Pontiff, on the Reparation Due the Sacred Heart. Catholics are here called upon to make amends to the Heart of the ee PT oy

Page 15

    FOREWORD Vii Sovereign King, ignored and contemned by the world, and to offer expiation also for their own offenses that have grieved the Divine Heart. To this end the Encyclical prescribes a special Act of Reparation to be recited each year in all the churches of the world, on the Feast of the Sacred Heart. The importance attached by the Church to this subjet is therefore clear. The purpose of the author has been faithfully to interpret the spirit of the great papal documents that are meant to be especially directive for our own and future times. Careful attention has further been given to reveal the full historic background of the message conveyed in these Encyclicals. Finally the Acts of Consecration and of Reparation, as prescribed in them, are here given, and also the indulgenced Act of the Consecration of the Family to the Sacred Heart of the Divine King of kings and Lord of lords. An invaluable addition for convenient reference is the Appendix containing, in their entirety, the two Encyclicals on Christ the King and on Reparation. The translations are those issued by the National Catholic Welfare Conference, and copyrighted by it.

Page 16

Page 17

    CONTENTS THE ETERNAL KING CHAPTER I PrepicTion or Curist’s KincsHIP II Tue Nature or Curerst’s KincsHip . III True Concept or Curist’s Kincpom . ITV Worwv-Conqurst aND SELF-CoNQUEST THE KINGDOM MILITANT I Cmrrst’s SoverrIGcNty ImpucNED II Promotion or Curist’s Kincpom . III Rvuvers or Tuts Worip’s Darkness . IV TrrumpHant Cominc ofr THE KING THE CROWN OF THORNS I Tue THorn-WreatHeD Heap oF Cueist . II Tue SHapow oF A Crown oF GoLp . III Czrrerst’s Kincpom Nor Po titicav . IV Tue Bioopy Crowninc oF Our Kinc . THE KING OF GLORY I Tue STANDARD OF THE KING . Il Tree or SHAME AND THRONE OF GLoRY . Ill Tue Propuet’s Five Worip-Empirss . IV Tue Kincpom Wuicu Gop Has Ser UP . THE QUEEN MOTHER I Mary as QueEN IN THE Earty CHurRcH . II Ovr Lapy’s CoronaTION IN HEAVEN . ix 105 III

Page 18

    x - CONTENTS CHAPTER III Mary, Our Queen ImMMacuLATE . IV Dispenser oF ALL THE Kino’s BountTiEs . THE GREAT PATRON I JosepH’s Power AND EXALTATION . : II JosepH’s ReLaTion To Curist THE KING . III Parron Over ALL Curtst’s KincpoM . THE HEART OF THE KING I Rercn oF THE SacrED Heart ForeTox . II “In Tuts Sicn Conquer” . a tai III ConsEcraTION oF Worxtp To SAcrED HEART THE ROYAL SERVICE I Tue Feast of Curist THE Kinc . II Socrat Reicn of Curist THE KiNG III Reparation Dur THE Sacrep Heart . IV Reten oF Curist Over THE Famity . TO THE SACRED HEART I Acr oF ConsEcrATION OF THE Human Race . II Acr or REpaRATION To THE SAcrED Heart . III Acr or ConsEcRATION OF THE FamILy IV Acr or Persona Loyatty To Our Kine . APPENDIX Tue EncycricaL on Curist THE Kinc . Tue EncyciicaL on REPARATION 213 743

Page 19

Page 20

Page 21

    THE ETERNAL KING 1. PREDICTION OF CHRIST’S KINGSHIP IAR back in the early history of the Israelite race, Ps prediction of the Kingship of Christ was made by the mouth of the Gentile Prophet Balaam. “‘A Star shall rise out of Jacob,” he declared under the Divine inspiration, “and a scepter shall spring up from Israel.” (Num. xxiv, 17.) Centuries passed, and illumined from on high the Prophet David sang in Still clearer terms of the future Messianic King. He should be set over Sion, the Church of the living God; to Him all the nations of the earth should be subject, and He Himself would be the very Son of God. In the second Psalm, which is particularly prophetic of Christ’s Kingship, we are presented with this future Ruler describing in His own words the Kingship set apart for Him by the Eternal Father: “But I am appointed King by Him Over Sion His holy mountain, Preaching His commandment. “The Lord hath said to Me: 3

Page 22

    4 : THE REIGN OF CHRIST “ *Thou art my Son, This day have I begotten Thee, Ask of Me, and I will give Thee The Gentiles for Thy inheritance, And the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession,’ ”’ (Ps. ii, 6-8.) So through the Psalms ring on the wonderful predictions of that great Messianic King. “With Thy comeliness and thy beauty set out, proceed prosperously and reign,” the Prophet greets Him, and then, ascending higher, proclaims in glowing words His Divinity: “Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever; the scepter of Thy Kingdom is a scepter of uprightness.” (Ps. xliv, 5, 7.) Thus the Prophet did not lose sight of the two distinct natures in Christ, the human and Divine. He is God from eternity, man begotten in time: the God-Man King. No less clearly is the universality of His Kingship predicted, which we are told shall extend in a reign of justice and peace over all the earth: ““And He shall rule from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth. ?s (Ps. feet} As time advanced came the great Prophecies of Isaias, Jeremias, Daniel, and Zacharias. Well might we depict these seers of Israel! Standing, scroll in hand, glorious about the Throne of that Son of Man, of whose Kingdom there shall be no end. Each in turn limns for us his own

Page 23

    THE ETERNAL KING 5 picture of the Divine King as foreseen by him. Together they present Him to us under many and various aspects. We behold Him in His greatness, His tenderness, His power, His beauty, His meekness and humility of Heart; in His sufferings as welll as in the glory of His exaltation throughout eternity. Few passages of the Old TeStament are more familiar to us than that of the Prophet Isaias in which he tells us of the future coming of the mighty King, who should be no less than God Himself, the Infinite, appearing upon earth in the lowly and endearing form of a human Babe. Jubilantly he sings: “A Child is born to us, And a Son is given to us, And the government is upon His shoulders, And His name shall be: “Wonderful, Counsellor, God the mighty, The Father of the world to come, The Prince of peace. “His empire shall be multiplied, And there shall be no end of peace; He shall sit upon the throne of David, And over his kingdom.” (Is. ix, 6, 7.) In the same manner Jeremias beheld Him as a descendant of David, by nature both Man and God, who should

Page 24

    6 _ * TEE REIGN OF CHRIST rule in wisdom and in justice. “I will raise up to David a just branch,” he makes the Eternal Father say. “A King shall reign and be wise, and shall execute judgment and justice on earth.” Salvation and security shall come through Him, and the name by which He shall be called is to be: “The Lord Our Just One.” (Jer. xxiil, , 6.) : Neither Isaias nor Jeremias means to imply that the so-called “‘names”’ they assign to the future Saviour are to be underStood as proper names in our sense of that word. They are merely terms by which the Prophets mean to express the qualities that will distinguish the Divine King who is to reign over a universal Kingdom of which there shall be no end. But to Daniel was given the vision of that same Infnite Ruler, the Son of God and yet “the Son of Man,” as He will appear in glory when time shall be no more. He is shown coming on the clouds of Heaven into the Presence of the Eternal Father, “the Ancient of Days,” of whom the Prophet says: “And He gave Him power, and glory, and a Kingdom; and all peoples, tribes and tongues shall serve Him. His power is an everlasting power that shall not be taken away, and His Kingdom that shall not be destroyed.” (Dan. vii, 14.) The glory of external royalty was not to be assumed by Christ here below, but will shine forth all the more resplendently in His heavenly Kingdom, where He is .

Page 25

    THE ETERNAL KING 74 to reign forever. But the Church, His Kingdom upon earth, must continue its task after His own glorious Ascension to the Father until it too will finally be translated into glory with Him, for the Militant Kingdom of Christ on earth is to find its fulfilment in the Triumphant Kingdom in Heaven. Of this last Stage of Christ’s Sovereignty Daniel wrote in the passage I have just quoted. But it was the Prophet Zacharias who with wonderful charm described the public appearance of Christ the King on earth, in all His lowliness and humility of Heart. The Jews who mistakenly looked for His imperial coming here below in all the pomp and panoply of royalty, with flying pennons and victorious legions, had sadly overlooked the words of this Prophet when he sang: “Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Sion! Shout for joy, O daughter of Jerusalem! “Behold thy King will come to thee, The Just and Saviour: “He is poor, And riding upon an ass, And upon a colt, the foal of an ass.” (Zach. ix, 9.) So in reality were the Jews to behold Him on His great entrance into Jerusalem, when they would strew

Page 26

    8 ‘ THE REIGN OF CHRIST their branches of palm before Him and spread their garments in His way. A few days more, and the supreme tragedy would be enacted of which the Prophets had no less clearly foreseen every detail. The entire Passion can be described by piecing together the prophetic passages of the Old Testament that tell of the humiliations and sufferings of the future Messias King. The exact date had been prediéted by Daniel when “Christ the Prince,” should be put to death (Dan. ix, 26), while the Psalmist no less minutely foretold not merely the piercing of His hands and feet, but even the parting of His garments among them by the soldiers, and the casting of dice for His veSture. (Ps. xxi, 19.) And yet, as the Prophets no less clearly assured us, the final victory of that King of sorrows was never to be in doubt. In few but mighty words the royal Psalmist expresses the everlasting triumph of the Messianic Ruler, seated at the right hand of the Eternal Father: “The Lord said to my Lord: Sit Thou at My right hand, Until I make Thy enemies Thy footstool.’ ” (Ps. cix, i.) 4 3 $ 7 ~ as Such, in the Prophet’s words, was the promise of the Father to Christ, the Immortal King of Ages. In vain would the Gentiles rage and the people devise vain things. In vain would the rulers of the earth stand up

Page 27

    THE ETERNAL KING 9 and its men of might and blood meet “against the Lord and His Christ.” All mus at last submit to His sway of love or be crushed beneath the force of His infinite and irresistible power: “Thou shalt rule them with a rod of iron, And shalt break them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.” (Ps. ii, 9.) The very place of the birth of this King had been accurately predicted in that charming Prophecy of Micheas which we never tire of repeating and which, with each recurrent Christmas Day, is like the sound of music in our ears: “And thou, Bethlehem Ephrata, art a little one among the thousands of Juda: out of thee shall He come forth unto me that is to be the Ruler in Israel: and His going forth is from the beginning, from the days of eternity.” (Mich. v., 2.) The temporal birth of the Messianic Ruler, in the little town of Bethlehem, here foretold, is thus at the same time Strikingly associated with His going forth from the beginning, His eternal birth from the Father, His Divinity. The same Divine Person, possessing the Divine nature received from the Father, “from the days of eternity,” would in the course of time take unto Him 

Page 28

    10 * THE REIGN OF CHRIST self also a complete human nature, to be given Him by a human Mother. What the Prophet prediéted we now all know took: place in that very Bethlehem of old, when the Word was made flesh of the Virgin Mary, and dwelt in our midét, Emmanuel, “God with us.” But to all these Old Testament Prophecies, which I have not tried to exhaust, there was added Still another. It was spoken by no mortal lips, but by the Angelic Ambassador from the Court of the Most High, sent to the little maiden Mary, espoused to a man named Joseph, of the house of David, in the city of Galilee called Nazareth. The hour of God’s Providence had come, and humbly the great Archangel Gabriel announced to her the Son who should be born of her: “He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Most High and the Lord God shall give unto Him the throne of David His father; and He shall reign in the house of Jacob for ever. And of His Kingdom there shall be no end.” (Luke i, 32, 33.) Thus the Archangel himself once more repeated and summarized for us, as it were, the Prophecies of Christ’s Kingship and Kingdom that would now go into fulfilment. Surely there can be no doubt as to the fact of Christ’s universal Kingship. t ¥. » . a «

Page 29

    THE ETERNAL KING 2. NATURE OF CHRIST’S KINGSHIP The first question naturally to be asked is: in what precisely does that Kingship consist which the Old Testament so clearly predicted of Christ, which He Himself so plainly and frequently asserted, and which through the centuries the Church has unfailingly acknowledged? In answering this question we must first determine under what aspect we are to consider Our Divine Lord, since with equal truth He is both God and Man. As God Our Divine Lord is by nature one with the Father and the Holy Ghost from all eternity, uncreated, infinite, omnipotent, equal in all things with Them. Of His Kingship, therefore, under this aspect, there can be no doubt. His are the Heavens and the glory of them; His is the earth and the fulness thereof. “Where wast thou,” He could speak to Job out of the whirlwind, “when I laid the foundations of the earth ... when the morning Stars praised Me together, and all the sons of God made a joyful melody?” (Job xxxviii, 4, 7.) Before Abraham was Christ is. “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word II

Page 30

    I2 _ * THE REIGN OF CHRIST was God. . . . All things were made by Him, and without Him was made nothing that was made. . . . And the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us.” (John i.) As Creator of all Christ must necessarily also be King of all. It is only, therefore, regarding Christ as Man that any doubt as to His universal Kingship might possibly have arisen in the mind of anyone, and it is under this aspect particularly that the Holy See, in the great Encyclical Letter on Christ as King, vindicates for Him the complete dominion over all things here upon earth, as well as over the celestial spirits in Heaven, and over the entire creation. Considered as Man Christ is King dy nature. The universal sovereignty over all created beings is due to Him because of the union in Him of the Divine with the human nature, under the single Personality of the Eternal Word. There is in Him, as we know, no confusion of these two natures, for He is perfect Man as He is perfect God. “He is God, begotten before all ages from the substance of the Father; and He is Man born from the substance of His Mother in time.” Such is the wording of the Athanasian Creed. That union whereby the Second Person of the Blessed Trinity thus took to Himself human nature, uniting it to the Divine nature, under His single Personality, we call the Hypostatic Union. And from this it follows, as the Holy See declares, that “‘not only is Christ to be adored

Page 31

    THE ETERNAL KING 13 as God by angels and men, but also angels and men mut be subject to His empire as Man.” The reason is apparent at a glance. As soul and body constitute one man, so God and Man constitute one Christ, without confusion of natures, but with singleness of Person. So intimate is this union that even the human operations of Christ are themselves both human and Divine. Considered as performed by the human nature they are human, but being at the same time the actions of the Second Person of the Blessed Trinity they must also be Divine. Owing, therefore, to the HypoSstatic Union Christ possesses a dignity which demands no less than that every power compatible with the end of the Incarnation should be ascribed to Him as Man. Such a power is His universal Kingship over angels and men, and His complete ownership of all created things. But there is Still a second reason why Christ is universal King of all mankind. It is to be found in the right acquired over us by purchase. “Buying back’—that is the meaning of the word Redemption. At a “great price,” indeed, He bought us back when we were lost through sin. The ransom paid for us was no less than His own Precious Blood. “You were not redeemed with corruptible things, as gold and silver,” the Scripture solemnly reminds us, “but with the Precious Blood of Christ, as of a lamb unspotted and undefiled.” (I Peter 1, 18, 19.)

Page 32

    14 - THE REIGN OF CHRIST The Kingship which thus belongs to Christ is both spiritual and temporal. Regarding the spiritual aspect of Christ’s Kingdom the Encyclical already quoted leaves little to be added: “This Kingdom is in a special manner spiritual and concerned with spiritual things. In fact on more than one occasion when the Jews and even the Apostles themselves erroneously thought that Christ would establish liberty for the people and restore the kingdom of Israel, He deprived them of this vain opinion and hope. “Proclaimed King by a surrounding multitude of admirers, He deprecated both the name and the honor, by fleeing and hiding himself from them. Before the Roman Governor He declared His Kingdom to be not of this earth. It is a Kingdom, as described in the Gospels, into which men may prepare to enter by doing penance, into which they cannot enter except by faith and Baptism. That Baptism, though an exterior rite, signifies nevertheless and effects interior regeneration. “This Kingdom is opposed only to that of Satan and the powers of darkness, and it requires of its citizens not only that with minds detached from riches and earthly goods they cultivate refinement of morals, and thirst and hunger after justice, but also that they deny themselves and take up their cross.” To deliver us from the slavery of Satan is the spiritual purpose of the warfare waged by the Kingdom of Christ on earth, that so, by voluntary obedience, we may ad.

Page 33

    THE ETERNAL KING 15 vance continually in the service of our true Lord and King, enjoying in all the fulness of its supernatural riches the freedom of the children of God. In words of winsome grace and touching affection the great Apostle St. Paul expressed this thought when he wrote to the Colossians exhorting them to give thanks to God the Father, “who hath made us worthy to be partakers of the lot of the Saints in light; who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the Kingdom of the Son of His love.” (Col. i, 12, 13.) Yet in stressing in a special manner the spiritual nature of this Kingdom, we must not overlook the temporal kingship and dominion which equally belong to Christ as Man. “All power is given Me in heaven and on earth,” are the words in which Christ Himself announces His complete supremacy, temporal no less than spiritual. (Matt. xxviii, 18.) Obviously it is as Man that this power is given Him, for as God He possesses all plentitude of power from eternity. Here on earth He merely did not choose to exercise His supreme authority over all men and His entire ownership of all things, including every form of all material wealth and possession. On this point of Christ’s temporal empire, too, the Encyclical of Pope Pius XI is clear beyond all possibility of misunderstanding: “Tt is a shameful thing to deny to Christ, as Man, empire over any civil matter, whatsoever it may be. Since He has from the Father the most absolute right over

Page 34

    16 ‘ ‘THE REIGN OF CHRIST created things, in such wise that all are placed in His power. However, as long as He lived on earth He abStained from exercising such dominion. Although He despised the possession of human things and the effort to acquire them, yet He allowed and Still’ allows them to their possessors.”” Long ago the same doétrine, now so plainly set forth by the Holy See in its pronouncements on the spiritual and temporal power of Christ as Man, was no less clearly expressed within the Church. Vasquez and other great theologians held that Christ as Man possessed not merely the fulness of spiritual power, but complete temporal sovereignty as well: Jus regis temporalis super omnia— “the right of a temporal king over all things,” although He did not choose to exercise it. With equal correctness leading theologians went Still further and ascribed to Christ what indeed no other king could ever dream of acquiring: Jus dominit in singulas res mundi, “the right of ownership over every single thing on earth,” admitting that it was exercised by Him in regard to a few things only. Suarez and Lugo defended this opinion. Both these rights, as here described, the right namely of complete temporal sovereignty over all men and the right of complete temporal ownership over all things on earth, the Church now assures us are to be universally acknowledged in Christ the King, as Man, undiminished by one title, untarnished by one doubt. But that

Page 35

    THE ETERNAL KING 17 as God these rights belong to Him has always Stood beyond controversy. In brief, what the teaching of the Church on the royalty of Christ, as Man, implies is that all things are absolutely His possession and at His free disposal. Kings, rulers, executives are all His subjects and exercise their authority by His permission only. The wealth of factory, field and mine is equally His own. All capital, under whatsoever form, belongs to Him, and can be used by men only in Stewardship to Him. Yet it is not Christ’s purpose to interfere continually, by miraculous interventions, in this terrestrial order of things. Both authority and capital can therefore be abused, as they frequently are, without necessarily provoking any immediate interference on His part. No slightest recognition may even be given to His Kingship and Ownership. With God there is no need of haste. Surely and suddenly the great day of reckoning will come, when Christ’s sovereignty shall stand confirmed in the eyes of all the world and a full account must be given. Then will all justice be fulfilled by Him, and those who now deride His patience shall know His power. The power of Christ as King is really threefold: legislative, judicial, and executive. If even one of these elements were missing, as the Holy See declares, there would no longer be a true and real supremacy. “The Holy Gospels not only telll us that Christ pro 

Page 36

    18 ee THE REIGN OF CHRIST mulgated laws, but they also present Him in the very act of making them. . . . Christ Himself affirmed in the presence of the Jews who had accused Him of violating the Sabbath by curing the paralytic, that the Father had given Him judicial power: “For neither doth the Father judge any man, but hath given all judgment to the Son.” (John v, 22.) By this we must understand that He had the right of rewarding and punishing men even during their lives, since this inheres in the power of judging. Executive power must equally be attributed to Chris, since it is necessary for all to obey His commands, and for none to escape them without meeting the punishments He eStablished.”’ Christ, therefore, is King—King in all truth and reality. He is King of the individual; King of the family circle; King of society in its every phase: religious, civil, social, industrial, commercial and educational. He is King no less of the nations themselves, whether singly or in their relations with one another. He is King, in fine, of every group of peoples and every league of nations. In a word, Christ is King of all the earth, King of all mankind, King of Catholic, Protestant, Jew and Infidel. Such is the full truth so definitely proclaimed to all the world by the Holy See.

Page 37

    THE ETERNAL KING 3. TRUE CONCEPT OF CHRIST’S KINGDOM The New Testament abounds with allusions to Christ’s visible Kingdom. The Prophets had foretold it, but now John the Baptist was sent to prepare the way for it: ““Do penance: for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.” (Matt. ili, 2.) Then came Christ Himself, and at the very beginning of His public ministry we are told concerning Him: “And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom.” (Matt. iv, 23.) The Apostles correctly understood, although as yet very imperfectly, that there was question of a visible Kingdom which Christ was to establish. In this they foresaw that they would hold positions of dignity. Hence we have the ambition of the two sons of Zebedee finding expression through their mother’s intercession for them with Jesus: “Say that these my two sons may sit, the one on Thy right hand, and the other on Thy left, in Thy Kingdom.” (Matt. xx, 21.) The views of the other ten Apostles did not differ from those of John and James, as is quite evident from what the Scripture immediately adds: “And the ten hearing it, 19

Page 38

    20 > THE REIGN OF CHRIST were moved with indignation against the two brethren.” (Ibid. 24.) Yet this anticipation of a visible Kingdom, which Christ was to establish, however mistaken in its particulars, was essentially correct and Christ never disabused them of it. On the contrary all His words confirmed it. But the visible Kingdom He was to found would be far different from anything they could now comprehend. When the fulness of the Holy Ghost should have come down on them—then they would understand. The gradual organization of that Kingdom eStablished by Christ can be followed in the Acts of the Apostles, from the great Day of Pentecost on to its complete development in the lifetime of the Apostles, with Bishops ordained and set over its various communities or “churches.” The Divine King Himself was now indeed no longer visible in the midst of His own, but He had definitely appointed His Vicar, who should be the visible head of His Kingdom on earth, and who through his successors would continue to govern that Kingdom to the end of time under its invisible Ruler, Christ the King. “Thou art Peter,” are the memorable words of the Saviour which no attempts of criticism can ever obliterate or explain away, “and upon this rock I will build My Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give to thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven.” (Matt. xvi, 18, 19.) 4 ¥ j

Page 39

    THE ETERNAL KING 21 The fulness of His royal power, immeasurably surpassing all other authority ever held by man, Christ expressed when He said: “‘All power is given Me in Heaven and on earth,” to which He immediately added His last commission: “Going, therefore, teach ye all nations; baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the world.” (Matt. xxviii, 18-20.) The visible ministry of teaching was to precede the visible administration of the Sacrament of Baptism, by which entrance was granted into His visible Kingdom. The great future conquests of that Kingdom were to be in the mission fields, already pointed out to the Apostles, where service was hard, sacrifices were abundant, and death for Christ the King was the ultimate reward here below. Besides the large cities of Jerusalem and Alexandria, there were then also a number of metropolitan ports scattered over the Roman Empire. These centers, in which numerous proselytes were collected, became the first churches of the Gospel of the Kingdom, and Starting points for its propagation. Soon the new spiritual Empire of Christ, now fully organized and developed, had spread, far and wide. Many were converted out of the various tribes and races, and gladly made their submission to the Divine King.

Page 40

    22 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST The ApoStles, with the Bishops ordained by them, were the rulers of that spiritual Kingdom. Its first expansion naturally was within the bounds of the pagan Empire of Rome, whose dominion extended over all the civilized world. Along the military roads built for the march of the triumphant Roman armies and over the bridges that had resounded to the tread of the legions on their way to foreign conquests, the messengers of Christ now sped to preach the Gospel of the Kingdom. Over hills and mountains, through forests and plains, the roads led on to the ends of a world subject to the imperial sway of the Caesars and tributary to the wealth of Rome. Yet in the Providence of God the pride and power of the pagan conqueror had thus only prepared the way for the new spiritual conquests of the world for Christ the King. Already the Prophecy of Ezechiel was going into fulfilment: “Thus saith the Lord God: I Myself will take the marrow of the high cedar, and will set it: I will crop off a tender twig from the top of the branches thereof, and I will plant it on a mountain high and eminent. “On the high mountain of Israel will I plant it, and it shall shoot forth into branches, and shall bear fruit, and it shall become a great cedar: and all the birds shall dwell under it, and every fowl shall make its nest under the shadow of the branches thereof.” (Ezech. xvii, 22, 23.) SSE LS Sk Se OS OM ey ae lg ae ate i oc

Page 41

    THE ETERNAL KING 23 From the very top branches, therefore, of “the marrow of the high cedar,” which represents the royal Stock of David, a tender twig was to be cropped, that is Christ the King, who should come from the royal house of David. The mountain, “high and eminent,” on which that twig should be planted is the Kingdom over which Christ would rule, His Holy Church, catholic, that is universal. ‘““The mountain of the house of the Lord,” Isaias calls it, which “shalll be prepared on the top of mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it.” (Is. ii, 2.) Christ Himself had no less clearly foretold that universality of His Kingdom, the Church. “The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed,” He said in His familiar parable, “which a man took and sowed in his field. Which is the least indeed of all seeds; but when it is grown up, it is greater than all herbs, and becomes a tree, so that the birds of the air come, and dwell in the branches thereof.” (Matt. xiii, 31,32.) The Kingdom of Christ, then, is perfectly visible and unmistakable, as all these predictions of it make most plain. It is visible in its rulers whom Christ appointed to govern it, the Apostles and their successors. It is visible in its Key-bearer, Peter, set over His entire flock by Christ and continuing his ministry in the unbroken line of Sovereign Pontiffs. It is visible in its preaching of the Gospel, its Sacraments, and all the material means that it must use in its mission for the salvation and sanc 

Page 42

    24 a TEE REIGN OF CHRIST tification of mankind. It is visible, finally, in the characteristic notes that mark it off from every other society on earth: its unity, holiness, universality and apostolicity. All these we see verified in the Catholic Church alone, the one and only Kingdom of Christ on earth. That Kingdom, as is evident, can admit of no sects or schisms. It is essentially one and undivided. For as Christ the King so definitely declares, a kingdom divided against itself shall fall. There is but one Church that knows of no divisions; from which, by revolt or schism, others have separated themselves, but which itself goes back, one and undivided, to the time when Christ established it on Peter. Within that Church, Christ’s Kingdom, there continues to the end of time the one Sacrifice of the New Law, foreshadowed by Melchisedech and instituted by Christ: “Do this for a commemoration of Me.” (Luke xxii, 19.) It is the clean oblation which the Prophet so vividly predicted should be offered up by the Gentiles over all the earth: “For from the rising of the sun even to the going down, My name is great among the Gentiles, and in every place there is sacrifice, and there is offered to My name a clean oblation: for My name is great among the Gentiles.” (Mal. 1, 11.) The vivifying principle within that Kingdom is the Holy Ghost, who is the Soul of the Church. He enlightens, inspires and sanctifies the individual soul, but His indwelling in that Kingdom is necessary in a particu 

Page 43

    THE ETERNAL KING 25 lar way that He may guide its rulers in all truth. So - more and more fully we realize the wonderful beauty and grandeur of that Divine Institution which is Christ’s Kingdom on earth. Yet holiness, although one of the distinétive marks of this Kingdom, does not imply the sanétity of each of its subjects. Christ Himself makes this clear: “Again the Kingdom of Heaven is like to a net cast into the sea and gathering together all kind of fish.” The fishermen, when it is filled, draw towards the shore, and there choose out the good, but cast forth the bad. “So shall it be at the end of the world,”’ Our Lord continues. “The angels shall go out, and shall separate the wicked from among the just.” (Matt. xiii, 47-49.) But the Kingdom of Christ, His Holy Church, is not destined then to come to an end. It is eternal. It shall continue in Heaven, purged of every imperfection that was connected with it here below. There, in that Kingdom Triumphant, we are called to share with Christ the eternal reign of His glory.

Page 44

Page 45

    THE ETERNAL KING 4. WORLD-CONQUEST AND SELF-CONQUEST To bring about the practical acknowledgment of the royalty of Christ and the propagation of His Kingdom throughout the world must obviously be our great and ultimate purpose. But to do this properly and according to the desires of the Divine Heart, we must first look to ourselves. What is of the utmost moment to us personally is our own perfect loyalty to Christ the King. Among the great souls who mightily promoted the Kingdom of Christ on earth St. Ignatius is particularly distinguished for an eager and chivalrous devotion to Christ the King. That title he strikingly applied to the Divine Saviour in those remarkable meditations on the Kingdom of Christ and the Two Standards. But it is characteristic of the far-sightedness and practical wisdom of this apostolic Saint, guided as he was by the Holy Spirit, that after his introductory proclamation regarding the Kingdom of Christ, and his soulStirring summons to a crusade far more vast than even St. Bernard preached, he suddenly turns to the almost exclusive consideration of our own personal service of Christ the King. 27

Page 46

    28 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST Just when we are set on fire with the thought of world-conquest for Christ, the Saint bids us think of self-conquest—not that he would have us ignore the former, but that he would render us fit for such a task by first overcoming ourselves. The desire of the Saint in urging us to put on the livery of Christ the King is to raise our souls to so sublime a height of fervor and enthusiasm that out of pure love for our Divine Leader we may wish to bear with joy even poverty, humiliation and contempt in company with Him, so to become more like to Him who bore all these for love of us. Thus he would have us counted among the chosen few, most close to the Person of their Leader, who share with Him in His hardships and sufferings as they are hereafter to share with Him in His glory. That same chivalrous ideal of St. Ignatius all the Saints doubtless understood, but each in his own way. The Holy Father, in his appeal to the Faithful, equally demands of them in the first place a complete personal loyalty on their part towards Christ the King. But for this he too finds it necessary to call on them to deny themselves, take up the cross, and follow in the footsteps of their Divine Leader. With such a surrender of ourselves accomplished we shall not reét untill we too can perform our part in the conquest of the world for Christ the King, be it by example, by alms, by prayer and sacrifice, or perhaps by ——

Page 47

    THE ETERNAL KING 29 the entire dedication of ourselves and all we have to His Divine service. But though self-conquest must logically precede world-conquest, it is obviously not intended that we should negleét our neighbor until we have entirely perfected ourselves. The Holy See assures us that even the work of self-perfection will be greatly facilitated by generously endeavoring to live a life of apostolic zeal. Both aims are to be seriously kept in view. While laboring for others we are to take the time and care to render ourselves, by God’s grace, constantly more subject to Christ, devoting to His service all our faculties of body and soul. Once we are inflamed with this love and zeal for Christ the King, our very failures will only be the preparation for future successes. St. Teresa of Avila, as a mere child, set out from home with the purpose of seeking martyrdom at the hands of the Moors, but was promptly intercepted and returned to her home. St. Francis of Assisi, long before her time, went into the very presence of the Soldan to preach to him, but with no better success. St. Ignatius, fired by the same spirit, made his first goal the spiritual conquest of the Holy Land, then in the power of the Turks. He too was doomed to as complete a failure as St. Francis and the little child Teresa who ran through the Streets of Avila, her heart aflame with the love of God.

Page 48

    30 is THE REIGN OF CHRIST For all these three Saints the land of the Moor represented the Infidel World as opposed to the Kingdom of Christ. All failed in their attempts. But the point was that they had all learned first to conquer themselves, and nothing thereafter could discourage them. So where they succumbed in one venture they succeeded in a thousand others, for the glory of their Lord and King and the spreading of His Kingdom over the face of the earth. From century to century their work continues, and Still from land to land their great campaign extends, winning souls for Christ the King. First then let us try entirely to subdue for Christ that one little province which is “ourselves,” smaller though it is by far than the tiniest speck of earth whose dwellers ever hoisted their colors to the skies. We are, indeed, each a province, sovereign as against all other men in our natural rights, but subject, one and all, to Christ the universal King—a part, however tiny, of His world dominion. Yet it is not to size and importance, but to loyalty and love, that Christ looks. As God He can create for Himself millions of worlds, but what He wishes from us first and foremost is the free, joyful and loving submission to His royalty of that one little province, just Ourselves. Small as it is it has its own distin& divisions—mind, will, soul, and body—each of which must be gladly and voluntarily placed under His dominion. Minutely the

Page 49

    THE ETERNAL KING 31 Holy Father has set all this forth in one pregnant passage: “If to Christ the Lord is given alll power in heaven and on earth,” he says, “if mortal men, bought by His most Precious Blood, are subject to His sway by a certain new title, if finally this power embraces all human nature, it is clear that nothing in us is exempt from such an empire. “He must therefore reign in the mind of man, and man with perfect submission should assent firmly and consistently to revealed truth and all the doétrines of Christ. He must reign in the will which should obey the Divine laws and precepts. He must reign in the soul, which denying its natural appetites; should love God above all things and adhere to Him alone. He must reign in the body and its members, which as instruments, or to use the words of St. Paul, as ‘arms of justice unto God,’ should serve for the interior holiness of souls.” If thus we belong to Christ entirely we shall seek only the promotion of His interests and the accomplishments of His desires, until with the Apostles we too shall be able to exclaim: “I live, now not I, but Christ liveth in me.” (Gal. ii. 20.)

Page 50

Page 51

Page 52

Page 53

    CHRIST THE KING ENTHRONED AMONG HIS OWN Barabino

Page 54

Page 55

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 1. CHRIST’S SOVEREIGNTY IMPUGNED HEN Pope Pius XI, in his Encyclical on Our . Lord Jesus Christ as King, wished to specify the supreme malady of our day, which everywhere throughout the world is infecting human society, he characterized it by the one word—‘“Laicism.” The word thus used by him sounded unfamiliar to many ears in other than European countries, nor has it _ grown more familiar since then. In Europe, doubtless, the expression was common enough, and for that reason it was employed by the Holy Father, who left no doubt as to the exact sense in which he meant it to be underStood in his Encyclical. It implies the practical negation by men of the Kingship of Christ. Whatever name we may apply to this evil, its seriousness remains unquestionable. It is confined to no one country, but can be found everywhere. The Holy See evidently did not believe that any words could be too Strong to stigmatize its malignity and destructive nature. “The pest of our age,” Pope Pius XI wrote of it, “Taicism, as it is called, with its errors and nefarious workings.” 35

Page 56

    36 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST Surely when such terms are used by the Shepherd of God’s people we may be certain that there can be no doubt of the gravity of the evil thus brought to our notice. To realize the better the significance of these words let us go back to the middle of the fourteenth century, when another pestilence, of a different nature, suddenly Struck the Christian world. In a comparatively short period it carried off one fourth of the population of Europe. Men called it the “Black Death.” In 1348 it passed across the channel into England. The disastrous moral effects that followed in its wake have left their consequences to the present day. Yet the Black Death, which at one sweep of its ominous wing destroyed whole villages, whose brooding shadow depopulated entire cities, and whose awful ravages turned all Europe into one vast charnel house, was in reality less deadly than the fatal plague so Strongly referred to by the Holy See. Men well understood, in those fearful days, the evil that had befallen them. There was no delusion. In fear and horror they beheld the fair color of their bodies turned to black, and knew by this sure presage that death awaited them beyond all hope except from God alone. But the supreme misery of modern society is that it does not recognize its fatal malady. Its condition is best described in the words of the apocalyptic writer:

Page 57

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 37 “Because thou sayest: I am rich and made wealthy, and have need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.” (Apoc. iii, 17.) To give the briefest possible definition of Laicism I may call it the exclusion from modern society of Christ the King. What worse malady than to be without Him who alone is the Way, the Truth and the Life? But in reality there are many Stages to this fell disease. Its symptoms go back to the Reformation, and beyond even that time to the moral decadence that followed in the wake of the Black Death. It was sufficient, however, for the Holy Father to say that it had not arisen in a day, but had “already long infected the organisms of States.” In brief, beginning with a gradual ignoring of the Church, it passed on to the rejection of her divinely given authority, thence, to the practical negation of the Kingship of Christ, and so finally to the attempted obliteration of God Himself from His creation. All these Stages Pope Pius XI enumerates in his description of the origin and progress of the disease. “The empire of Christ over all nations,” he says, “was beginning to be denied.” After thus indicating the earlier symptoms of the malady, he proceeds to lay bare, stage by Stage, its successive phases as manifested in the body politic: “The Church was denied her rights which flowed from

Page 58

    38 ‘THE REIGN OF CHRIST the very jurisdiction of Christ: her rights of teaching mankind, of making laws, and of spiritually governing the people to bring them unto eternal happiness. By degrees the religion of Christ was placed on a footing with false religions and most unbecomingly lowered to their level. Next Christ’s Church was forced into subjection to civil powers and abandoned to the will of princes and magistrates. Some went Still further and desired the substitution of mere natural religion and a vague natural emotionalism for Divine religion. Governments even arose which imagined they could do without God entirely, and convert their attitude towards religion into one of impiety and negleét of God.” Such, then, is an accurate diagnosis of that “pest of our age, Laicism,” from its denial of the spiritual supremacy of the Church of Christ to the complete turning away of governments from God. The climax was reached in the actual subSstitution of impiety and blasphemy for religion. We here have in mind, for instance, the mimicking of the sacramental rites of the Church by the impious ceremonies of the godless Soviets. Nor did these evils end here, but they continuously found new expression in open religious persecution, ranging from attacks upon the natural liberties of Catholics and their right to educate their children in Christian schools, to decrees of banishment, and sentences of imprisonment and death.

Page 59

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 39 Hardly, in faét, had the Great War “‘to make the world safe for Democracy” come to an end when these tyrannies broke out flagrantly and with entire impunity beyond the immediate borders of the United States themselves. Nor did the press of the world find a voice to excoriate this suppression of all freedom and democracy, carried as it was to almost unimaginable excesses. But long before these events the very apotheosis of Laicism had been reached in the vaunt of that petty Statesman who in his imbecility boasted of having blotted out the lights of heaven. The “most bitter fruits” which this defection from Christ on the part of individuals and society brought about are enumerated in the Encyclical. They were the sowing of the seeds of hatred, the kindling of the flames of envy, the spreading of dissensions among nations, the indulgence of unrestrained passions which are often paraded under the mask of patriotism and of zeal for the public good, a boundless egoism and selfishness, disturbances of domestic peace owing to forgetfulness and disregard of marital obligations, rupture of family ties, and the ultimate ruin of a society shaken to its very foundations. In the enlightened exposition of these disorders of modern society by the Holy See we are taught to underStand how all these Dead Sea fruits of bitterness are really the product of that one evil, defection from Christ

Page 60

Page 61

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 2. PROMOTION OF CHRIST’S KINGDOM Evidently there is but one method to be used in dealing with this modern apostacy, and that is to do all that lies in our power, personally and corporatively, to bring back Christ to the modern world. We must seek by every legitimate means to restore His empire to the individual, to the home, to society, and to the nations in their relations with one another. For this reason the Feast of Our Lord Jesus Christ as King was instituted. It was to Stimulate in us a new, enthusiastic, and militant loyalty to Him. In the words of Pope Pius XI: “Certain it appears to us that an annual celebration of the Feast of Christ the King will greatly assist all nations towards a condemnation of and a reparation for those public apostacies which Laicism, with so much harm to society, has begotten. In fact the more the dear name of Our Redeemer is passed over in shameful silence, be it at international meetings or be it in parliaments, so much the more is it necessary for us to acclaim Him as King, and to announce everywhere the rights of His royal dignity and power.” 41

Page 62

    42 ; THE REIGN OF CHRIST While, therefore, the celebration of the Feast itself is of necessity an annual event only, yet our loyalty to Christ the King, our interest in His cause, and our promotion of His Kingdom in all hearts and over all the earth are duties limited to no time or place. With characteristic frankness the Holy Father laments the faét that Catholics, who are in possession of the truth and should hold its torch aloft before the eyes of the world, too often fail to enjoy that weight of authority or to hold in the public view those positions which it were proper for them to have. So it happens, he concludes, that owing perhaps to motives of personal convenience, to apathy or to fear of opposition, they display a lamentable weakness, which emboldens. the enemy to proceed against the Church with greater effrontery. To quote the words of the Holy Father: “The annual observance henceforth of the Feast of Christ the King inspires the highest hopes that mankind may auspiciously hasten to return to the most loving Saviour. It should indeed be the part of Catholics to mature and hasten this return by their efforts and their works, but too many among them seem not to have in their communities that social Standing, as the saying is, nor to enjoy that prestige of authority which it ill becomes those to lack who bear ahead the torch of truth. This disadvantage may be due to the inactivity of good men, who either avoid opposition or face it weakly,

Page 63

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 43 with the result that the enemies of the Church grow in rashness and audacity.” Clearly, therefore, as a trumpet call he sounds the summons for every Catholic to take his place beneath the banner of Christ the King. Not merely are we to give Him our personal allegiance, but we are to exert all our power to rally devotedly around Him our parishes, our students, our societies, our Catholic people everywhere. It is the new call to a mighty world-wide crusade, waged with the weapons of the spirit. It is the clarion note of a more virile, more militant, more aggressive Catholicism. The rattling of the old bones of indifference and religious lethargy is to give way to the prompt resolve, the firm Step, the high flush of action, and the brave ambition to do at least our part to win the world for Christ. Only by forgetting ourselves completely for Him can we rise to the true Stature of our greatness, for we then become one with Christ. “But when the Faithful clearly understand,” says the Holy Father, “that they must fight with courage, always under the banner of Christ Our King, they will then study with the zeal of apostles how best to lead back to God the eStranged and uninstructed millions. At the same time they will themselves acquire Strength to keep inviolate God’s holy laws.” Our duty lies in bringing home to our people this understanding, and particularly to our Catholic Students,

Page 64

    44 * THE REIGN OF CHRIST who are meant to assume positions of leadership in that spiritual army of Christ. In a word, we must produce an enlightened, alert generation of Catholics, not merely on the defensive and meekly apologetic for their Faith, but spiritually on the offensive. Should we find we have failed to instill into those who come under our own care and influence that spirit of zeal and apoStleship, that readiness for selfsacrifice and personal service in the cause of Christ, then, no matter what else we may have accomplished, we cannot but conclude that we have failed in the supreme task entrusted to us. Thus the Catholic teacher in the Catholic school may have given to his pupils their full and satisfactory secular education, but if he has fallen short of impressing on them also, most practically and profoundly, the spiritual purpose of their attainments he has missed the great end of his vocation. What holds true of the classroom is no less true of the home, the pulpit, the press, the platform, and every other even more universal means of reaching the public and setting before them the message of Christ the King. To have us mobilize to the utmost in His cause every available agency is the ardent desire of His Heart. He has come to cast fire upon the earth, and what would He but that it should burn? Needless to say, this spirit of the apostolate, which has flamed in the hearts of all God’s saints, is not confined to

Page 65

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 45 the public ministry, but has its place in the most hidden life and the most cloistered State. Who, for instance, can tell how much of the wonderful work for Christ accomplished by the first companions of St. Ignatius may have been due to the sacrificial and apostolic lives of hidden souls, such as the nuns of the great St. Teresa of Avila, who then was eStablishing those numerous foundations of her convents where ceaseless offerings were made of prayers, penances, and labors for the priests of God? Who knows how many a Peter Claver was helped in his apostolic career by the fervent zeal of an Alphonsus Rodriquez; how many an Augustine may have contributed mightily to the upbuilding of Christ’s Kingdom on earth because of the tears and silent prayers of a saintly Monica? And who can say where the greater merit lay in God’s sight? Each of us has his or her own glorious apostolate if we shall but keep our hearts pure and our intentions right.

Page 66

Page 67

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 3. RULERS OF THIS WORLD’S DARKNESS To the Laicism of the world, promoted with all the power of the spirits of darkness in high places, must now be opposed effectually our own apostolate for the spreading of Christ’s Kingdom on earth. Fighting with us is a heavenly army, spirits of light and saints in glory, ranged at our side or interceding for us at the Throne of God. And great indeed is the need we have of them. Presumptuous would be our struggle if we relied on our own weak Strength alone as matched against the invisible powers of evil, ever vigilant, and filled with envy, hatred and despair. “Put you on the armor of God,” St. Paul exhorts us, “that you may be able to stand against the deceits of the devil. For our wrestling is not against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers, against the rulers of the world of this darkness, against the spirits of wickedness in high places.” (Eph. vi. 11, 12.) These are the invisible forces that Stood behind Paganism in the days of St. Paul, and just as surely they are now instigating, directing and supporting the apostacy of our day. Let us not deceive ourselves by imagining 47

Page 68

    48 _. ‘ THE REIGN OF CHRIST there is any exaggeration in the words of St. Ignatius when in his “Spiritual Exercises” he describes Lucifer, the mortal enemy of our human race, “how he summons together innumerable devils; how he disperses them, some to one city, some to another, and so on throughout the whole world, omitting not any provinces, places or States of life, or any person in particular.” Precisely that same spirit of tireless activity characterizes the human agents whom they inspire and who finally yield themselves to become their instruments. Notice, too, with what thoroughness the works undertaken in the service of “the rulers of the world of this darkness,” as St. Paul calls them, are so often conceived, and with what zeal and energy they are carried out. For let us never forget that Satan, in the equally true and vivid words of St. John, is “the prince of this world” (xiv. 30), and that it is with him we are battling to win back for Christ the Empire of which Laicism, through the insidious wiles of that prince of darkness, has sought to deprive Him. Not all, of course, that is accomplished in the world is evil. Much is in itself quite indifferent. But what a deluge of literature daily pours forth from our modern press in which the name of Christ is never mentioned and His Kingdom utterly ignored! What ceaseless productions are presented to the public in our innumerable motion picture halls and palaces, with never a hint of the supernatural life! And yet Chris has told us: “He

Page 69

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 49 that is not with Me is against Me, and he that gathereth not with Me scattereth.” In a word, the vast bulk of the literature and art on which the public is intelleétually fed, acknowledges no supernatural code, no religious authority, no Kingdom of Christ. It is therefore the expression of Laicism, sometimes in a purely negative, sometimes in a positive and ageressive form. Much of it, if not immoral is unmoral, if not irreligious is unreligious. Its morality, often, is simply the social convention of the group to which the authors belong. At its best it leaves men without any supernatural stay in the great temptations, trials, and crises of life. The atmosphere of an unhealthy Laicism, thus created, as distinct from the atmosphere of Faith which men breathed freely in the Middle Ages, is all about us. What wonder, then, if it enters Christian homes left Standing open to its influence. Even Religious Communities must be on guard against it. The spirit of the supernatural can so easily be lost in the bustle of daily activities that all must constantly beware the subtle emanations of that spirit which by degrees suffocates faith, hope and charity, or at least benumbs them in the soul. What threatens us, in brief, is a spiritual asphyxiation to which Catholics who freely inhale this atmosphere, too often succumb, and which has in the past proved deadly to many. Our remedy and safeguard are the watchfulness and prayer commanded by Our Divine

Page 70

    50 c THE REIGN OF Chien Lord, together with the sacramental life thrown open most generously by the Church to all the Faithful because we need it greatly in these days. What is the reason for our Catholic schools except that our children, in the most critical years of life, may escape this miasmic influence, against which they must further be protected through their entire educational period! And Catholic educators, in turn, must rise to a full understanding of their own responsibilities in this regard. Yet not merely during their educational period, but throughout life must Catholics be guarded agains the atmosphere of indifference and apostacy surrounding them. Hence we behold the solicitude of the Church in endeavoring to infuse the Christian spirit into every form of popular enlightenment and entertainment. 4 . of (eee

Page 71

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 4. TRIUMPHANT COMING OF THE KING Needless to say, our policy is not merely one of protection and of self-defense. Our purpose must ever be not only to subject our own selves entirely to the empire of Christ, but to win for Him also other souls—to restore His reign wherever it has been banished from the hearts and minds of men, from their private or public life, from their mutual relations with one another, whether commercial, industrial, political, international, or purely social and recreational, that Christ may reign in all things. It is not hard to realize what a tremendous effect this purpose, if once strongly conceived, must have upon our lives. Enthusiastic loyalty to Christ will then be the entire wellspring of our being. Greatly to love Him, and as greatly to make Him loved will be the sole passion and ambition we shall care to own. “Thou art beautiful above the sons of men,” shall we exclaim with the Psalmist, “‘grace is poured abroad in thy lips, therefore hath God blessed thee forever and ever.” But as He is all tenderness to those who love Him so He will be terrible to those who reject and resist His sovereign Kingship over them: 51

Page 72

    52 ¢ THE REIGN OF CHRIST “Thy arrows are sharp, Under Thee shall people fall, Into the hearts of the King’s enemies. “Thy Throne, O God, is forever and ever, The scepter of Thy Kingdom is a scepter of uprightness. Thou hast loved justice and hated iniquity, Therefore God, Thy God, hath crowned Thee With the oil of gladness above Thy fellows.” (Ps. xliv, 6-8.) But more impressive even than the Psalmist’s picture is Christ’s own description of His final coming to this earth in His full power and kingly majesty. “As the lightning cometh out of the east and appeareth even unto the west, so also shall the coming of the Son of Man be.” The sun, we are told, will be darkened, the moon refuse her light, the Stars swing out of their orbits, and the powers of the heavens will be moved. “Then,” continues the sacred text, “‘shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in heaven, and then shall all tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall! see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven, with much power and majesty. And He shall send His angels with a trumpet, and a great voice, and they shall gather together His elect from the four winds, from the farthest parts of the heavens to the uttermost bounds of them.” (Matt. xxiv, 30, 31.)

Page 73

    THE KINGDOM MILITANT 53 What a pitiable object in the sight of that overwhelming manifestation will be the dark, creeping, earth-bound thing we have called Laicism. Blinded in the effulgence of the glory and splendor streaming from the face of the Living God, it will look for the hills to cover it and the mountains to fall upon it and hide it away in that eternal darkness which will be its lot forever. Here on earth it loved darkness, it affeéted darkness, it was itself the fellow of that uncomprehending darkness whereof St. John wrote when he recorded the first coming of the Son of Man in our midst: “In Him was life, and the life was the light of men. And the light shineth in the darkness, and the darkness did not comprehend it.” (John i, 4, 5.) But then the day of retribution will have arrived. It will be the hour, no longer of darkness, but of light. Pricked to the core of its being Laicism will dwindle away with all its false pretensions. The pride and conceit of the world will shrivel up like a scroll in the fire. But with eyes divinely anointed the Blessed will look up and behold in all His glory the Immortal King of Ages. Yet how ashamed should we be, if at that final coming of the Son of Man in all His kingly power and majesty, we should be obliged to look back regretfully upon a life of neglected opportunities, of resolutions unfulfilled, of loyalties broken or but half-heartedly ren 

Page 74

    : C5 by the “goodness n ieve the ia to pa. and in rease “th ie, 0

Page 75

    “THE CROWN OF THORNS:

Page 76

Page 77

    CROWNED WITH THORNS AND SCEPTERED WITH A REED Murillo

Page 78

Page 79

    THE CROWN OF THORNS } 1. THE THORN-WREATHED HEAD OF CHRIST _ UT of the mist of years there Stands forth one C Visage with most Striking clearness. Saints and | sinners turn to it. Nothing more vividly impresses itself on the imagination or more deeply imprints its image on the hearts of men than that Face which the Prophet saw centuries before, its look “‘as it were hidden and despised,” yet which art has never tired of reproducing: “Hail the thorn-becrownéd Head, Face with spittings vile o’erspread; Hail that Visage, bleeding, marred, Smitten with the reed and scarred, And wounded all with blows!” Looking upward to that sacred Face of the God-Man nailed to the Cross, men and women in every generation have drawn from it courage to toil, endure and suffer for love of Him who bore so much for love of them, who, “having joy set before Him, endured the Cross, despising the shame.” (Hebr. xii, 2.) To wear the livery of Christ is the sublime ambition 7

Page 80

    58 |< THE REIGN OF CHRIST of those who aspire to the heights of Christian perfection. That livery of the King, in those who approach most close to Him in His privations and sufferings, is one of poverty at least in spirit, of humiliation and contempt. But the motive inspiring such a desire is none other than the love of Christ, and because of that love, the great and consuming wish to be most like to Him. Only that same motive of Divine love was able to bear upward the Saints to those rare heights where they could find in suffering itself their supreme happiness. To be delicate members under a thorn-crowned Head ever seemed to them the most abhorrent of all things, sin alone excepted. Beautifully and dramatically this entire thought is symbolized in the familiar incident from the life of St. Catherine of Sienna. Offered by her Heavenly Bridegroom the free choice between a crown of thorns and a _ crown of roses, she reached out, without hesitation, to the crown which Christ Himself had worn. How, with that great love she bore to Christ, her King and Saviour, would it have been possible for her to deliberate when to her mind came at once the thorn-crowned Head of her Love Crucified! From earliest childhood the Little Flower, too, had been taught these truths and was filled with the same heroic sentiments by the Divine Master, who in Person undertook to instruct and train her. Recording the senti 

Page 81

    ‘THE CROWN OF THORNS 59 ments which inspired her after one of her very first Holy Communions, she wrote: “My heart became inflamed with an ardent desire for suffering, and I felt convinced that many crosses were in store for me. Then my soul was flooded with such consolation as I have never since experienced. Suffering became attractive, and I found in it charms which held me spellbound, although as yet I did not appreciate them to the full.” Such are the wonders the grace of God could accomplish even in the soul of a child, who was so marvelously drawn to what nature, left to itself, could only contemplate with dread. And what were those charms by which the Divine Bridegroom thus captivated the heart of that little one whom He was preparing for Himself, and who responded so eagerly to all His advances of love? Surely foremost among them was the knowledge that she would thus become most like to Him. Referring to her devotion to the Holy Face, as practised in her more mature years, she concluded with this very thought: “T have made my life Study of these words of Isaias the Prophet: “There is no beauty in Him, nor comeliness; we have seen Him, and there was no sightliness that we should be desirous of Him.’ They have been the foundation of all my devotion to the Holy Face, or rather the foundation of all my piety. I, too, should desire to be

Page 82

    60 © THE REIGN OF CHRIST like Jesus, without sightliness, without beauty, unknown to every creature.” We behold here the same keen desire which actuated St. Catherine of Sienna in passing by the wreath of roses and reaching out eagerly after the crown of thorns. With such sentiments were necessarily combined Christ’s own yearning after souls. His cry on the Cross, “I thirst,” veritably haunted the thoughts of the Little Flower. “The cry of Jesus agonizing, ‘I thirst,’ reéchoed continually in my heart,” she wrote, “firing it with an ardent zeal till then unknown to me. I longed to give my Beloved to drink; I too felt myself consumed with thirst for souls, and at all costs I would win sinners from the eternal flames.” Thus, with the dart of Divine love deep in her heart, she could sing the swan’s immortal song in answer to that cry of Christ, returning Him love for love. Strong and sweet are the words of her canticle: “In wondrous love Thou didst come down from Heaven To immolate Thyself, O Christ! for me, So, in my turn, my love to Thee is given, I wish to suffer and to die for Thee. “To be like Thee is my desire, Thy voice finds echo in my soul,

Page 83

    THE CROWN OF THORNS 61 Suffering I crave. Thy words of fire Lift me above earth’s mire And sin’s control.” But to be like Jesus was not sufficient for her. She yearned to be with Him as well. “Too scant earth’s narrow scope!” we hear her cry, “the glorious Vision of Thy Face I crave.” That love at last became a very martyrdom in which she yielded up her soul to God. Truly could she write: “My long slow martyrdom of fire Still more and more consumeth me. Thou art my joy, my one desire, Jesus, may I expire Of love for Thee!” But even beyond the gates of death her wishes carry her, and she knows that only then will her apostolate for souls here upon earth really begin when she is dissolved and with Christ. Nor will there be any rest for her in this work of zeal until the last trumpet shall have pealed and time shall be no more: “Then I shall reSt, then I shall be able to rejoice, because the number of the elect will be complete.” In a word that Divine thirst for souls will not be slacked within her while there is still one sinner to be saved on earth. Here then is reached the very utmost

Page 84

    us now turn to Siar Divine Bs itself, ae it under the special aspect of Christ’s Kingship. The strong — contrast thus evoked is indeed mot impressive. es Strange as it may seem, the theme of that Kingship of Christ is nowhere brought home to us so constantly __ and vividly, during the entire earthly life of Our Saviour, as precisely duriie: the hours of His bitter Passion and Death. ae

Page 85

    THE CROWN OF THORNS 2. THE SHADOW OF A CROWN OF GOLD Reference, indeed, is made to the Kingship of Christ in no uncertain manner at the very moment preceding the fulfilment of the Mystery of the Incarnation. Infinitely more Stirring than any pomp and flourish of trumpets, heralding the entrance of earthly majesty, is the solemn announcement by the Archangel, Heaven’s Ambassador to the Virgin Mary, of the coming of the Orient from on high, the advent of the Mighty Ruler, who “shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Most High; and the Lord God shall give unto Him the throne of David His father, and He shall reign in the house of Jacob forever. And of His Kingdom there shall be-no: end.” (Luke 4, '32,°33:) But the glory of the everlasting Kingship of Christ, and the extension of His Kingdom to the uttermost parts of the earth, were not, as we well know, to lend their splendor to His mortal life. They were to find their shining symbol in no crown of gold encircling His head, as the Jews anticipated. All such thoughts vanish at once as we behold the Divine Child, the new-born King, with a Stable for His palace and a manger for His 63

Page 86

    64 ‘THE REIGN OF CHRIST throne, while between ox and ass, on the earthen floor, kneel Mary and Joseph. But poverty, humiliation and suffering are instead made sublimely lovable, as marking the free choice, on His first visible appearance in our midst, of Christ the King. Hardly had Christ been born in Bethlehem when His Kingship was brought to royal attention, but with results outwardly most humiliating and tragic. So Divine Providence permitted it to be. “Where is He that is born King of the Jews?”’ the Wise Men asked of Herod. They had seen His Star in the East and were come to adore Him. To Herod, however, it seemed at the sound of those words, as if his own petty throne suddenly swayed and rocked beneath him. There could be no peace for him now until he had compassed the death of the Babe whom he regarded as the rival to his royalty. Already, therefore, the Kingship of Christ is interpreted in a political sense, and the peaceful houses of Bethlehem are made to run with the blood of slaughtered infants, the firstlings of the long line of martyrs who would shed their blood for Christ the King. ““A voice in Rama was heard, lamentation and great mourning; Rachel bewailing her children, because they are not.” (Matt. ii, 18.) But out into the night, beneath the cold Stars, Joseph had fled with the Child and His Mother, homeless, friendless, to seek refuge in a digtant land. Who then

Page 87

    THE CROWN OF THORNS 65 seemed more unroyal than the Babe at His Mother’s breast; who more impotent than that exiled King, roofless, in a pagan land? Non eripit mortalia qui regna dat celestia. He was not here to wrest away earthly crowns who came to give celestial thrones. But Herod, obsessed with his ambitions and political suspicions, could not think of that. Poverty, humiliation, suffering, bloody persecution are already, therefore, the appanages of Christ’s royalty. With the opening of His public life we again behold the shadow of an earthly kingship falling long and large across His path. This time it is by Satan in person that the issue is raised. We remember the temptations of Christ in the desert. Twice the tempter had been foiled by Christ. The third time, the Scripture tells us, he took up Our Divine Lord into a very high mountain, and there showed Him “all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, and said to Him: ‘All these will I give Thee, if falling down Thou wilt adore me.’ ”’ (Matt. iv, 8, 9.) What else can this imply, understood in the language of that day, except the promise of a universal world empire, over which Christ should reign as King? “AU the kingdoms of the world” Satan delusively pledged himself to place under the single scepter of that one royal and mysterious Being there before him, whose nature was not revealed to him, whom he dreaded but could not fathom. And Christ, the All-holy, permitted Himself

Page 88

    66 ‘ THE REIGN OF CHRIST to be taken up by that fallen Angel to the solitary mountain height, and there solicited to accept a crown of world empire at the price of apoStacy from God! Truly, the patience of the Infinite! Once more we come to a great epochal period in the life of Christ. It was the eve of the great Eucharistic Promise, when He meant to give the first intimations of that sublime Mystery of Faith which He would institute a year later at the Last Supper. Two stupendous miracles were now to be worked by Him as an evidence of His power, that all might believe in His words when the Promise itself of the Eucharist should be given. The first of these miracles was the multiplication of the loaves and fishes. There were present at that event from ten to twenty thousand persons—five thousand men, the Scripture says, together with the women and children. All ate of the five loaves and two fishes which Christ then multiplied for them, and twelve baskets full of fragments were left over from the feast. Nothing, it would seem, should have been able more profoundly to move these people to the very depths of their being with a sense of the supernatural than this manifestation of Divine power to which they found themselves brought so close. They were stirred, it is true, and that most deeply, but only to give fresh vent to their old nationalistic ambitions. So far were they carried in this fener that they were determined even to seize Christ, and make Him their

Page 89

    THE CROWN OF THORNS 67 national King, whether He wished it or not. “Jesus, therefore,” are the words of St. John, “when He knew that they would come to take Him by force and make Him king, fled again into the mountain, Himself alone” (vi, 15). The mention of kingship had made Him flee from Herod. It now caused His flight from His own people. How grieved must that Divine Heart have been, filled as it was with thoughts of ineffable love, when across it there fell again the cold shadow of a purely earthly, political crown!

Page 90

Page 91

    ae THE CROWN OF THORNS 3. CHRIST’S KINGDOM NOT POLITICAL Between the offering of a crown and Chriét’s Passion just about one year elapsed. Then it was that the question of His Kingship—wilfully misinterpreted, misrepresented and misunderstood—was to become the turning point of the whole Tragedy of Calvary. In their own Sanhedrin the Jews had condemned Jesus on the charge of blasphemy. To the High Priest’s solemn adjuration, in the name of the living God, to tell them: “If Thou be the Christ the Son of God,” Jesus with equal solemnity affirmed this Divine Sonship; “Thou hast said it.” Then, before the tempest fell, there followed just one blazing vision of His eternal Kingship, to be swallowed up immediately in the total! eclipse of humiliations and sufferings that were now to overwhelm Him. “Nevertheless,” were His words, “I say to you, hereafter you shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of the power of God, and coming in the clouds of heaven” (Matt, xxvi, 64).It is as King that He will come to the judgment of the world. The Jews did not faill to give to Pilate the true reason 69

Page 92

    70 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST for their condemnation of Jesus: ““We have a law,” they said, ‘‘and according to the law He ought to die, because He made Himself the Son of God” (John xix, 7). But that reason failed sufficiently to impress the mind of the Roman Governor. The religious reason was therefore deliberately changed into a political charge of treason against Caesar: “If thou release this man, thou art not Caesar’s friend, for whosoever maketh himself a king, speaketh against Caesar.” (John xix, 12.) This charge of political aspirations of royalty, aspirations which most of all Christ abhorred, was to prove decisive by arousing Pilate’s fears, for immediately the Scripture continues: “Now, when Pilate had heard these words, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the judgment seat.” There were Still some futile efforts on Pilate’s part to save Christ by playing in turn on the nationalistic sentiments of the Jews. “Behold,” he said, “your King!” And to their frenzied cries: “Away with Him!” “Crucify Him!” he raised the question: “Shall I crucify your King?” But it was all in vain. The charge of aspiring after political kingship ended in the Crucifixion. Through all the centuries the methods here followed in the condemnation of Christ have constantly been repeated in the attacks against Him in His members, and against His Mystic Body, the Church. They are the methods used in our own country and in our own day. Ambition of political power on the part of the Church,

Page 93

    ah, ae ae a THE CROWN OF THORNS 71 her rulers and representatives, is the accusation that will continue doubtless to be repeated, with tireless reiteration, to the end of time. The disciple is not better than the Master. What they have done to Him they will do to His followers no less. But preceding the events just related Our Lord had clearly set forth before the Roman Governor an explanation of His Kingdom that rendered Pilate’s action inexcusable. The very first words which St. John records as addressed to Christ by Pilate were: “Art Thou the King of the Jews?” To which Christ ultimately gave the answer: “My Kingdom is not of this world. If My Kingdom were of this world, My servants would certainly Strive that I should not be delivered to the Jews: but now My Kingdom is not from hence.” To Pilate’s further questioning; “Art Thou a King then?” Christ replied with a definite affirmation: “Thou sayest that I am a King.” (John xviii, 33-37.) Two things Christ tells Pilate concerning His Kingdom. In the first place, that although it is in this world, yet it is not “of this world.” It is no political sovereignty such as He was accused of conspiring to eStablish in opposition to Caesar’s rule. Secondly, it is not “from hence.” It is not acquired by political intrigue or military uprising, but is set up by God. ‘The God of Heaven,” wrote Daniel the Prophet, “will set up a Kingdom that shall never be destroyed.”

Page 94

    72 oe THE REIGN OF CHRIST (Dan. ii, 44.) This sufficed to refute the charges on which, out of fear of the Jews, Pilate ordered Christ to be put to death; and it suffices for us. Yet, though Christ’s Kingdom is “‘not of this world,” and “not from hence,” He Himself, as King of kings and Lord of lords, is truly King no less over all temporal rulers and governments, than over His spiritual Kingdom, the Church. He merely did not wish, as we have said, to exercise this power in an earthly way. “All power,” He Himself clearly tells us, “is given Me in heaven and on earth.” (Matt. xxviii, 15.) There is no exception made by Him.

Page 95

    THE CROWN OF THORNS 4. THE BLOODY CROWNING OF OUR KING Pilate first delivered Christ to be “chastised.” Never in history was king clad in purple like to that which covered the royal Person of Our King in the fearful agony of the scourging. A. worm and no man! He had taken our iniquities upon Him and bore in His Body the Stripes due to our sins. From a thousand channels, opened by the cutting, tearing, lacerating scourges, the Sacred Blood poured forth and mercifully robed Him in the only royal mantle ever worn by Him. But word of the Kingship of Christ had already reached the coarse Roman soldiers. It appealed to their barrack-room sense of humor. “King of the Jews!” A despised King of the most despised nation, rejected by His own people, and delivered utterly helpless into their hands. The pure Son of Mary, perfect in His human nature, and so also most susceptible to every form of pain— what a Victim for their brutal jests! They would see to it that He should not lack any royal ceremony. Nothing should be wanting to His coronation. 73

Page 96

    74 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST What now followed was a mockery inexpressibly painful in the physical sufferings it entailed; infinitely humiliating in the indignities, outrages and contempt it implied; utterly crushing in the callous debasement of the Divine royalty of the Saviour King. It was Satan’s fitting revenge, put in the minds of these men, for Christ’s refusal to accept the visionary crown of world empire offered on that solitary mountain top. Another crown was now awaiting Him, not, alas! visionary, but only too real. Yet this crown Christ, in His Divine foreknowledge, had already accepted willingly, gladly, and of His own free consent—out of love for us. Between the scourging and Christ’s renewed summons by Pilate there was Still abundant time for the soldiers to work out their will with Him, as Hell itself might instigate. The scene which thus took place is of vast significance in the history of humanity. It was the world’s own coronation of its King, completed by His elevation to the throne of the Cross. There, as He foretold, He would thereafter draw all things to Himself. But for the present a¢t of coronation, too, a throne had first to be procured—a battered relic, it may be, drawn from some dusty barrack heap, where the ragged cloak of scarlet may also have been found to be cast for a royal mantle about the bloody shoulders of the King. With cruel forethought and diabolic ingenuity a crown

Page 97

    THE CROWN OF THORNS 5 of thorns had meantime been platted, and all was ready for the mock ceremony. With an agony of pain unthinkable the keen, piercing thorns, reddened with the Sacred Blood, thrust their points deep and deeper into the forehead and delicate, sensitive temples of the Son of God, until His whole head was circled with a torment as of flame. Then, with mail-clad hands they pressed down Still more firmly upon that wreath of anguish, to make perfect to its last detail this dreadful a¢ét of coronation. So, forever, the world should remember the Visage of its thorn-crowned King. Here mankind would learn its lessons of the vanity of all earthly honors. Here the saints would draw new strength to welcome with delight, suffering, humiliation, contempt and death itself for love of Him. But one thing still was wanting. A scepter must be given to the King. Into His bound hands a soldier thrust the long, gaunt reed that he had cut for this purpose. All was now completed, and in boisterous homage the entire band fell down upon their knees, and bent their foreheads before the royal Presence of the King, thus enthroned, crowned, and sceptered at their hands: “And bowing the knee before Him, they mocked Him, saying: ‘Hail, King of the Jews!’ ” Nothing further was needed except to bring Him also their loyal tribute. This was to be plentifully given Him. Their prostrations completed, the soldiers leaped up from

Page 98

    76 ‘ THE REIGN OF CHRIST their places and “‘spitting upon Him, they took the reed and struck His head.” (Matt. xxvii, 27-30.) Into His face they vented the vile spittle of their foul mouths. That was their tribute to the King. And Still more was given Him in the cruel blows they hailed upon His head. Taking the reeden scepter out of His hands they struck down with it upon the crown of thorns, scoffing and jeering in their rude mirth to see His whole sensitive frame wince and shudder at each agonizing blow. From a hundred burning wounds the Precious Blood flowed forth anew with every Stroke, blinding the Divine eyes, running in Streams or tricklets over the bruised cheeks, clotting the torn hair and beard, and washing away, it may be, in this ablution, some of the terrible defilement which at various times had been voided from the mouths of the servants and soldiers, and even of the priests in the Sanhedrin itself on that Holy of Holies, the Sacred Face of Christ the King. Well might the Prophet write when in vision, centuries before, he looked upon that Divine Countenance: “There is no beauty in Him nor comeliness; and we have seen Him, and there was no sightliness that we should be desirous of Him. Despised and the most abject of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with infirmity; and His look as it were hidden and despised, whereupon we esteemed Him not. Surely He hath borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows, and we thought

Page 99

    THE CROWN OF THORNS TL, Him as it were a leper, and as one struck by God and afflicted. But He was wounded for our iniquities, He was bruised for our sins, the chastisement of our peace was upon Him, and by His bruises we are healed.” (Isaias lit, 2-5.) For us too, as for Theresa of the Child Jesus and the Holy Face, these words may well be the subject of a life study, and can by God’s grace become the foundation of a holiness, true, solid, tender and exalted, making us, with her, most like to Christ.

Page 100

Page 101

    RY Lo oy

Page 102

Page 103

    CHRIST IN HIS KINGDOM TRIUMPHANT Fra Angelico

Page 104

Page 105

    eNO, etd. it | parse THE KING OF GLORY 1. THE STANDARD OF THE KING \ X tg have followed our King along the path of His humiliation, we shall ascend with Him now in the triumph of His glory and witness in particular His glorification through the Cross. In the mind of the Church the debasement of Christ wonderfully blends into His exaltation. The Cross becomes His Throne. It is all precisely as He had predicted, that when lifted up He would draw all things to Himself. The punishment of the crucifixion, as is well known, with the painful and humiliating scourging that ordinarily accompanied it, was the extreme penalty inflicted upon slaves. By their very State they were already regarded as deprived of every last vestige of human dignity. Before the Roman law they were excluded from every human consideration, being classed pro nullis, pro mortuis, pro quadrupedibus—as nothing, dead, and legally ranked with the four-footed beasts. Yet at the price of a slave Christ had willed to be sold, and the death of the most criminal and hapless of slaves He freely accepted for love of us. 81

Page 106

    82 ‘ ‘THE REIGN OF CHRIST We might well be moved to wonder, therefore, that the Church’s most distinétive song of the Crucifixion should be a hymn of jubilant triumph more than of any other sentiment. For all the feasts of the Holy Cross, as also during Passion Week, and particularly at the Good Friday procession, when the Blessed Sacrament is borne from its Repository to the main altar, the special song of the Church is ever the exultant Vexilla Regis, the echoes of which continue to ring vibrantly through the entire Paschal liturgy as well. “The standards of the King advance, Bright shines the Cross’ mystery.” The vexillum was the old Roman cavalry standard, not a banner, as it is frequently translated to suit our modern conventions. On it, in the days of Constantine, the proud Roman eagle, with wings outstretched to conquer the world, gave place to the victorious Cross of Christ. It would have been difficult for the ecclesiastical poet to have found any image by which to signalize more Strikingly the triumph of Christ on the gibbet of shame, than precisely this allusion to the exaltation of the Cross on the Roman standard, supplanting there the ancient — emblem of all the wealth and power of Imperiall Rome— the eagle of Jove lowered before the Cross of the Galilean! It symbolized in a single phrase the triumph of Christianity over paganism.

Page 107

    THE KING OF GLORY 83 Perhaps, then, it may not be out of place here to recall the occasion itself for which the Vexilla Regis was originally composed, as still further illustrating that thought of Christ’s victory through the Cross. The date was November 19, in the year 569. At the request of St. Radegunda a particle of the true Cross was being sent by the Emperor Justin II to her MonaStery of the Holy Cross, at Poictiers. In a splendid triumphal procession, amid all the Iavishness of imperial magnificence, with princes and bishops in attendance, the sacred relic was solemnly borne from Tours to its deStination, while the sublime processional! of the Vexilla Regis rang out for the first time, thrilling the hearts of men and arousing in them those same emotions that Still are produced in us after thirteen centuries. What particularly lifts up our souls in this song is the thought of Christ conquering, Christ reigning through the Cross. The royalty, power and glory of Christ on that instrument of shame and death are Stressed with particular force in the lines of this hymn that are based on the famous tenth verse of the ninetyfifth Psalm. The Poet, Venantius Fortunatus, thus alludes to the words of royal David: “That which the Prophet King of old Hath in mysterious verse foretold Is now acknowledged, whilst we see God ruling nations from the Tree.”

Page 108

    es 84 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST The words a ligno, rendered here “from the Tree,” are now held not to have been in the original Scripture text, but to have been merely a marginal gloss of some scribe which found its way into the text. Yet this, evidently, cannot affect their really deep truth and beauty. They won great favor with the early Fathers, and the Church, by incorporating them into her Paschal liturgy, has made them permanently her own. At every Commemoration of the Cross, during all that season, the priest Still exclaims with the exultant Mother of the Faithful: “Proclaim it unto the nations, alleluia! That the Lord reigneth from the Cross, alleluia!” Even in the eyes of the world the sign of contempt has become the emblem of the highest honors. Men fasten it as their most precious distinétion on the breast of the conquering hero. The rude, rough cross of sufferings, hardships, or perils, heroically borne in some great cause, is thus converted into the golden symbol of merit and victory. In some such way Christ Himself will be honored on the Last Day, when the Sign of the Son of Man will appear in the heavens to herald His coming in glory to judge all mankind. Once more we have here that purposeful blending, now by the Divine Wisdom Itself, of the recollection of

Page 109

    THE KING OF GLORY 85 past humiliation with present exaltation. That Sign of the Son of Man, to which the Sacred Scriptures refer in the description of the future Judgment, is the Vexillum Regis, the Cross of Christ, the Standard of the King, which then will shine forth in splendor when all the tribes of the earth shall be gathered at the coming of the Son of Man, in the clouds of heaven, with great power and majesty. Here, then, is the important lesson, the practical truth so intensely grasped by the saints, so Strongly insisted on in particular by St. Ignatius in the Spiritual Exercises—that if we would participate with our King in glory we must share with Him first in His Cross. The measure of our participation in His trials, labors, weariness, suffering, and even ignominy, outrages and death itself, undergone by us for the love of Him, will be the measure of our share in His glory.

Page 110

Page 111

    THE KING OF GLORY 2. TREE OF SHAME AND THRONE OF GLORY During His whole mortal life, as we have seen, Our Divine Lord avoided all display of kingly power, clearly though He proclaimed the truth of His Kingship in the face of Jew and Gentile. But with His death on the Cross a new epoch began. In St. Paul’s letter to the Philippians occurs a passage which, as read in the Latin Vulgate, consists of just twenty-five words, yet into these the Apostle has compressed a history of Christ, both in His earthly humiliation and His heavenly glory. St. Paul thus writes of the Divine Saviour: “He humbled Himself, becoming obedient unto death, even to the death of the Cross, for which cause God also hath exalted Him, and hath given Him a Name which is above all names.”’ (ii, 8, 9.) As the turning point of this brief but comprehensive life of Christ, as I may call it, central between His earthly and heavenly existence, as portrayed in these few but mighty words, we see the Cross. For this the Infinite Word of God humbled Himself, descending from the eternal Throne of His majesty, and 87

Page 112

    88 ‘ ‘THE REIGN OF CHRIST was made man of the Virgin Mary, that after long years of subjection and obedience, after trials and hardships of every kind, after sufferings and weariness endured for us, He might finally yield up His life on the Tree of Shame. But that “death of the Cross,” which was the culmination of His earthly humiliations, was also the prelude to His heavenly exaltation: “For which God hath exalted Him.” And St. Paull further tells us how the Father exalted Him: “That in the name of Jesus every knee should bow of those that are in heaven, on earth, and under the earth: and that every tongue should confess that the Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory of God the Father.” (Phil. ii, 10, 11.) How closely humiliation and glory touch each other! How they almost blend into one another! How intimately, as cause and effect, they are eternally related! How that very Cross, upon the border line between them, belongs equally, although under quite different aspeéts, to them both, the Cross of shame and the Cross of glory, © now darkened by the night of Calvary’s eclipse, and then flashing in the skies as the dead arise to judgment! What a thought for us to ponder on! What a consolation and a joy to all in affliction, suffering, trial or disgrace! So conceived, so understood, so borne in a spirit of Divine Love, how all the dark sorrowings of earth

Page 113

    " THE KING OF GLORY 89 are in a moment illuminated with the glory of another world, and eternal splendors lie about them! For the saints indeed Love alone sufficed—“to love, to be loved, to make Love loved.” That motive, so pithily expressed by St. Theresa of the Child Jesus, makes the Cross attractive even here below while the shadows of earth still enclose us and we live by faith. With what delicate and wistful affection this Little Singer of our day dwells on the sweetness of conformity to God’s Will! “My joy I find in pain and loss, I love the thorns that guard the rose, With joy I kiss each heavy cross, And smile with every tear that flows. “When clouds the sunny skies o’ercast, And weary grows my heart the while, My joy it is that joy is past, And gone my Lord’s consoling smile. “My peace is hid in Jesus’ breast: May His sweet will alone be done! What fear can mar my perfect rest, Who love the shadow as the sun? “Since Love’s divine, celestial breath Is all I need my heart to bless, What matters life, what matters death? Love is my peace, my happiness!”

Page 114

    i, Be ee r ‘ eer go : THE REIGN OF CHRIST There, in a few lines, is the whole Christian philosophy of the Cross, which is also the whole Christian philosophy of life, seen in all the beauty of its sublime perfection. It is the full, ripe, divine philosophy of St. Paul expressed by the lips of a child, but from a heart enamored of the Cross. And it was through that same Cross that the sweet singer of those lines, our own Little Flower, was in turn to be visibly glorified even here below as few men or women have ever been in the whole course of human history. In brief it is but another and most tangible illustration, because brought so near to us, of the glory that flows from the Cross, of the flower that blooms from the root deep hidden in the darkness of the earth. “Amen, amen, I say to you, unless the grain of wheat, falling into the ground, die, itself remaineth alone. But if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit.” (John xii, 24, 25.) And surely we all may hope to attain to this spirit of Divine Love by the grace of God in which we can always trust. And indeed why not? Since after all the most necessary things are the most common, as water, air and bread—but what, in the spiritual life, is more necessary for us than Divine Love? Yet let us well remember that its secrets are revealed only to the little ones and the humble of heart: ““Amen I say to you, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child, shall not enter into it.” (Mark x, 15.) It was from the mouth of little children that Our

Page 115

    THE KING OF GLORY gr Divine Lord, direétly before His Sacred Passion, received that demonstration of praise which most greatly pleased Him. In his Processional Hymn for Palm Sunday, Bishop Theodulf, who lived from about the year 760 to 821, makes of this event the refrain which links together, as with a chain of gold, all the successive Stanzas of his song that begins: All glory, laud and honor To Thee, Redeemer King, To whom the lips of children Made sweet hosannas ring. Thou art the King of Israel, Thou David’s royal Son, Who in the Lord’s Name comest, The kind and blessed One. So, too, we see from these and other far earlier passages how completely the truth of Christ’s Kingship was grasped during every century of the Church’s history. It is written large over the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and it could not but be equally important in the lives of the Faithful of every period. “Christ conquers, Christ reigns, Christ rules, King of kings, our King, our Hope!”

Page 116

    Great, crowned on Christmas Day in a year “800 . Pope Leo III, do we owe the expression of loyalty to — Christ, the Sovereign King of Kings, which like a~ spiritual battle cry has come down to us through the cen- _ turies: “Christ lives, Christ reigns, Christ triumphs!”

Page 117

    THE KING OF GLORY 3. THE PROPHET’S FIVE WORLD-EMPIRES But let us now Study in turn the contrast to all this. It is nowhere, so far as I am aware, presented with such overwhelming power, on a scale so vast, as in that symbol of the “great statue” divinely shown to the King of Babylon. King Nabuchodonosor, we remember, had dreamed a dream which left him terrified, but the substance of it he was not able to recall. In vain he summoned his diviners and the wise men of his kingdom, the magicians and Chaldeans. God alone could reveal to him the secret and its interpretation, and this He did through Daniel His Prophet: “Thou, O king, sawest, and behold there was as it were a great Statue: this Statue, which was great and high, tall of Stature, Stood before thee, and the look thereof was terrible. “The head of this statue was of fine gold, but the breast and the arms of silver, and the belly and the thighs of brass: and the legs of iron, the feet part of iron and part of clay. “Thus thou sawest, till a Stone was cut out of a moun93

Page 118

    94 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST tain without aid of hands: and it Struck the statue upon the feet thereof that were of iron and of clay, and broke them in pieces. “Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of a summer’s thrashing floor, and they were carried away by the wind: and there was no place found for them: but the stone that struck the statue, became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth.” (Dan. ii, 31-35-) The head of that Statue, Daniel explained, was the King himself, representing the mighty Babylonian Empire, the marvel of the world in Strength, and power, and glory, under whose sway were “all places wherein the children of men, and the beasts of the field dwell.” But after it should rise up another world-ruling kingdom, inferior to it, and so of silver, the Medo-Persian; which in turn would be followed by a third, of brass, the Greco-Macedonian. Finally special stress is laid upon the fourth, which is of iron. “‘As iron breaketh into pieces and subdueth all things, so shall that break and destroy all these.” (Dan. ii, 40.) Who can fail to recognize here the future, imperial, world-ruling, world-crushing power of pagan Rome? That identification is placed beyond all controversy by the minuteness of detail with which in another chapter the Prophet refers to it as: “The fourth kingdom upon earth, which shall be greater than all the kingdoms, and

Page 119

    THE KING OF GLORY 95 shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces.” (Dan. vii, 23.) There in unmistakable terms is foretold the iron rule of Imperial Rome, with the merciless march of its armies, the captives dragged at its chariot wheels, and its haughty vaunt: “Romans the lords of the earth!” But “in the days of those kingdoms,” that is in the days of the last of them, since the Prophet piétures them as ruling successively—in the days therefore of Imperial Rome—a fifth kingdom should be set up, entirely different in its nature from all the others, not human but divine in its origin, and consequently indestructible by all the arms and powers and wiles of men. For: “The God of heaven will set up a kingdom that shall never be destroyed and His kingdom shall not be delivered up to another people, and it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and itself shall stand forever.” (Dan. ii, 44.) That Kingdom, the Catholic Church, with Christ as its royal Head, is the Stone “cut out of the mountain without aid of hands,” which should smite on its feet of iron and clay the huge symbol of all worldly greatness and power, and shatter it to pieces. But that Stone itself, the Church, would become a mountain, filling all the earth. Babylon the great is gone. Gone are the mighty kingdoms which in turn succeeded it and held the empire of the world. Gone is the last of them, Imperial Rome, with all its pride and glory. Vanished are they all on

Page 120

    96 <THE REIGN OE CHRIST the wind, “‘like the chaff of a summer’s thrashing floor.” The Catholic Church alone continues in her imperishable existence, the fifth kingdom which the Prophet foresaw, the Kingdom of Christ on earth, universal and indestructible, the mountain which “filled the whole earth” and whose massive rock no seas can wear away and no lightnings shatter. Men might, conceivably, remove the Andes; they might level the cloud-capped Alps, but they Strive in vain against the mountain of God which covers the earth. Words can go no further to describe the massive Strength of that Church of Christ, its world-wide Catholicity and its indefectibility. “Itself shall Stand forever.” Enduring on earth, it shall come to its perfeétion in Heaven.

Page 121

    THE KING OF GLORY 4. THE KINGDOM WHICH GOD HAS SET UP The Kingdom of Christ, which has triumphed over the ancient paganism, is in this world, but not “‘of this world.” It is the Kingdom set up by the God of Heaven; the Stone cut out of the mountain. Those who are not members of this Kingdom are none the less subject to Christ’s universal dominion. “I am appointed by Him King over Sion,” Christ says, referring to the Eternal Father in the words the Prophet places on His lips. Over Sion, His holy Church, He rules today as its acknowledged Head. But immediately the Prophet makes clear that absolutely all else must also be included under His empire. ‘Ask of Me,” he represents the Father saying to the Messias King, “, . . and I will give Thee The Gentiles for Thy inheritance, And the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession.” (Ps. ii, 6-8.) All must ultimately acknowledge His authority—if not now, then hereafter; if not through love, then by compulsion, under a power they will not be able to 97

Page 122

    98 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST resist. “Thou shalt rule them with a rod of iron,” the same Psalmist adds, as we recall, ““And shalt break them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.” Only when all His enemies shall have been made His footstool, in the words of the inspired seer, shall the uninterrupted reign of His glory begin in Heaven. Of that period the Prophet Daniel gives us the picture, to which we have elsewhere referred. With the last enemy made subject to the power of our Divine King, we behold Christ, in the clouds of Heaven, approaching the Eternal Father, and thus is described for us that future scene of glory: “T beheld therefore in the vision of the night, and lo, one like the Son of Man came with the clouds of Heaven, and He came even to the Ancient of days: and they presented Him before Him. And He gave Him power, and glory, and a kingdom: and all peoples, tribes and tongues shall serve Him. His power is an everlasting power that shall not be taken away: and His Kingdom that shall not be destroyed.”” (Dan. vii, 13, 14.) Here for the first time occurs that title, ‘“‘the Son of Man,” in reference to the Messias, and it is from this very passage that the Messias King, on His public coming, at the period Daniel had minutely prediéted in another passage, applied this name to Himself. It indicates that then the Prophet aCtually saw the Word of God in the human nature He was to assume. But the Divine nature of the Messias King is no less made clear by

Page 123

    THE KING OF GLORY 99 His coming in the clouds of Heaven, a manner of appearance reserved in the Sacred Books to the Divinity exclusively. We must, however, rightly underStand this passage. It does not imply that now, with the final conquest of Christ’s enemies, the eternal Kingship was to be beStowed upon Him, as if He had not previously possessed this already. Rather it was now to be publicly confirmed, as we might say. Or else this solemn act may be underStood as intended worthily to mark His entrance upon that new and most glorious phase of His reign when all His enemies shall have been subdued forever. Then shall the words of the Psalmist be completely fulfilled describing Yahwe, the Eternal of Days, as He bids Christ the King sit at His right hand, “until I make Thy enemies Thy footstool.” (Ps. cix, 1.) To that same period St. Paul referred when he pictured Christ as presenting His Kingdom to God the Father after the end of the world and the completion of all things, when nothing whatsoever should be left that had not been entirely subjected to the Saviour’s sway and royal dominion. With a gripping brevity and succinétness the Apostle describes this future a¢ct of the Redeemer King: “Afterwards the end, when He shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God the Father, when He shall have brought to naught all [other] principality, and all [other] authority and power. For He must reign until

Page 124

    I0O . THE REIGN OF CHRIST [the Father] hath put all His enemies under His feet. The last enemy to be brought to naught is death.” (I Cor. XV, 24-26.) So, in His humanity, the Son Himself shall be subject to the Father, “who,” as the Apostle continues, “subjected all things to Him, that God may be all in all.” And yet, Christ, being God also and one with the Father and the Holy Ghost, will not thereby lose His royalty but will reign over His Kingdom to which for all eternity there shall be no end. Such is the picture, wonderfully rich, which the Scripture presents of the glorified Christ as He enters on that third and final phase of His reign, when the turmoil of earth is over, the gates of hell are sealed, and the joy of Heaven shall be unceasing in the beauty, honor, power, glory, love and tenderness of its Immortal King. But now we are Still in our time of trial, when our greatest happiness should be to render full and free subjection to Him. Servus Christi was the title in which St. Paul gloried. To be the bondman of Christ was his pride. Never could he insist too often on his joyful submission to the supreme dominion of the Saviour, whose bonds are bonds of love, who would call us, not servants, but children and brethren: Jesus Christ, ‘the first-born among many brethren.” In the words of the Apostle we are to be: “If sons, heirs also; heirs indeed of God, and co-heirs of Christ.” Being the Master of all Christ chose to be in the midst 7" ta \

Page 125

    THE KING OF GLORY IOI of His own as one who ministers. Being the Lord of all, He wished to be sold at the price of a slave and die the death of a slave, that He might purchase for us the glorious liberty of the children of God. To belong to Him, then, completely and unreservedly should be our greatest happiness, who are His by right of nature and of purchase at the price of His Precious Blood. May we be His also of our own free volition, in labor and prayer, in suffering and joy, in life and in death. And if the motive of Divine Love should ever weaken in the moment of trial, may we be buoyed up and encouraged by the words of the Apostle: “For that which is at present momentary and light of our tribulation, worketh for us above measure exceedingly an eternal weight of glory.” (II Cor. iv, 17.) May a deep, intimate, personal love of Christ ever be the characteristic of our lives.

Page 126

Page 128

Page 129

    The text on this page is estimated to be only 40.40% accurate
    auipl OF painqunp NaaNO UNO ‘AUVW ONINMOWO ONIM FHL LSTYHO

Page 130

Page 131

    THE QUEEN MOTHER 1. MARY AS QUEEN IN THE EARLY CHURCH JEN CONSIDERING the royalty of Christ the King and | His empire over all mankind, our thoughts naturally _ turn to Mary also, ever most closely associated with — Him in joy and in sorrow, in suffering and in glory. Through the ages Christ has been hailed as King of kings and Lord of lords. But Mary, too, has received throughout the Christian world her due title of “Our Lady,” and is proclaimed by all generations “Queen of angels and of men.” When the Wise Men from the East came to Jerusalem they inquired: “Where is He that is born King of the Jews? For we have seen His star in the East and are come to adore Him.” (Matt. ii, 2.) And when they found the Child with Mary His Mother they opened their treasures and offered the threefold gift becoming Him as God-Man-King. How do we think that they conceived of Mary? How, in their Oriental imagination, which did not deceive them, could they possibly have thought of her except as the Queen Mother? That she was also Mother of God made her tenfold Queen. 105

Page 132

    ¥ 106 THE REIGN OF CHRIST True, she was not seated on a throne preciously wrought out of the gold of Ophir, but neither was Christ the King bedded in a royal crib of ivory, inlaid with topaz and with emeralds. They looked to the reality of things, and not to the outward show. The pomps of royalty they could readily enough have found at the court of the Idumaean Herod without seeking any further. Mary simply was for them Queen Mother of the Eternal King, to whom they had come from afar, following the star, to pay their symbolic tribute. Similarly the Apostles could have thought of her in no other way than as the Wise Men did. And just in proportion as they gradually understood more fully and more intimately the true nature of the Kingship of Christ, they also more perfectly conceived of the queenhood of Mary. When at first their minds were Still confused as to the temporal Kingship of Our Lord, Mary was to them the direct descendant of David’s royal line. Her house of Nazareth, where they in the beginning came to speak with Jesus, was as the house of royal David. When in course of time their conception of the Kingdom of Christ grew more profound and spiritual, and the Spirit of God came upon them, with Mary in their midst, seated in the very place of honor that Christ would have occupied, their reverence for her, as Queen Mother of their Eternal King, took on a new and far more sublime

Page 133

    THE QUEEN MOTHER 107 significance. It was not needed that they should call her by that name. They bore their loyal reverence in their hearts. With the Divine illumination which the Spirit of God gave them they could not fail to know her as the Great Woman of prophecy, foretold to our first parents in Paradise; the Mother of Emmanuel, “God with us”; and finally as the Queen Mother concerning whose royal Child the Archangel announced to her that He should be called the Son of the Most High, and should hold the throne of David His father, and reign in the house of Jacob forever. These were familiar facts to them. Understanding so clearly the Kingship of Christ, how could the Apostles conceive of Mary except as the Queen Mother of their Lord and God? But this truth, so obvious to all, was taken for granted, rather than solemnly proclaimed and preached. First it was necessary to make known to the world her Divine Son. The Mother’s honor would follow of itself. Besides she existed entirely for Him. Yet all this is not meant to deny that public honors were actually bestowed on her in the Early Church. At the coming of the Holy GhoSst we find her specifically mentioned. In the very earliest centuries her picture is painted in the catacombs with the Christ Child at her breast, or else she is seen Standing alone and praying for us with extended arms, the great intercessor with her

Page 134

    108 ‘THE REIGN OF CHRIST Son, who Himself is the One Mediator between God and man. Already in those first Christian works of art she is the Queen Mother of the King, before whom we behold the Wise Men pictured with their gifts of homage offered to her Divine Child, or at whose side we see the Prophet pointing to the star and thus also recalling to us the scepter that should spring up from Israel, Christ the King. About the fourth century, with the triumphant crushing of the venomous Nestorian heresy, we behold her not merely jubilantly hailed as the true Mother of God, but also gloriously depicted as the Heavenly Queen, seated on her celestial throne, and holding out to mankind her Divine Son. It was but natural that as this devotion unfolded she should have come to be called through all the ensuing ages by the great title of “Our Lady,” embodying fully the thought of her queenhood, as this is most clearly expressed in the title universally given her and most truly due to her: “Queen of angels and of men.” With St. Dominic the devotion of the Rosary made that title the lex orandi, the code of prayer, for the Faithful throughout the centuries. The ceaseless recommendation of this devotion by the Church, and in more recent times the repeated Encyclicals written for its promotion by the illustrious Pope Leo XIII left no shadow of a doubt that in the Fifth Glorious Mystery, ““The Cor 

Page 135

    cel ad th

Page 136

Page 137

    a ee ee <= ~ te THE QUEEN MOTHER 2. OUR LADY’S CORONATION IN HEAVEN It matters not in what precise manner we conceive of Mary’s Coronation. The essential fact itself is clear enough to every Christian soul, that Mary is truly Queen of Heaven, Queen of angels and of men, and that now, by the side of her Divine Son, she is interceding for us, her other children, with all the efficacy her high position gives her as Queen Mother in the sight of the Immortal King of Ages. Yet, as every Catholic also knows, there is a fundamental difference in the rights of Christ and Mary to their respective titles of royalty and queenship. By His very nature, as the Incarnate Word, Christ is King of angels and of men. Mary, on the contrary, holds all her privileges and her power solely by reason of her relation to Christ. Again, Christ is King by reason of the Redemption, in that He purchased us with His Precious Blood. But in this great work, too, which in itself could be wrought by Christ alone, Mary codperated in her own way, although only secondarily and subordinately to Him. Hence, too, she could most properly be crowned as Queen at the IIt

Page 138

    J i hed . THE REIGN OF CHRIST side of her Divine Son with whom she had participated in His sufferings, as she had conceived and borne Him, and had brought Him up for His supreme Sacrifice by which the world was to be redeemed. To that Sacrifice she had already consented even in her “Fiat,” at the Angel’s message, when she accepted with all its consequences her Mother’s part in the Incarnation. What then could finally be more fitting than Mary’s Coronation? For Christ there can be no coronation. The crown belongs to Him already from the first moment of His existence. By reason of the Hypostatic Union He was conceived a King. Quite appropriate indeed are the crowned Statues and pictures of Christ the King, but the religious ceremony of publicly placing a crown upon a Statue of the Saviour is forbidden by the Church. It is unauthorized and misleading. Veni coronaberis, “Come, thou shalt be crowned,” could well be said to Mary by the Most Blessed Trinity, but not to Christ, who will come as King, offering to the Father all things made subject to Him at the end of the world. It is no mere fancy, but a substantial truth, that to the Infant wrapped in swaddling clothes and laid in a manger by Mary’s hands, belonged the earth and all its fulness. He was King even then of angels and of men. Few conceptions, on the other hand, have found more favor with Christian artists and Christian peoples than the Coronation of Our Lady. We behold her enthroned

Page 139

    THE QUEEN MOTHER 113 in the highest heights of Heaven. The glory of the Most Blessed Trinity encompasses her. Worshipfully she bends forward where she is seated opposite her Divine Son, who wears His own royal crown and places with loving hands the queenly coronet on the immaculate brow of Mary. The Holy Ghost hovers over her, in the shape of a dove, and the great spiritual figure of the Eternal Father enfolds her from above, as His beloved Daughter, in whom He is well pleased. The veneration of angels and the rejoicing of saints fills in the sublime scene. Our own hearts go out to her with a fondness that words cannot express as we witness her humility, her tenderness, her love. A warm and comforting feeling comes over us, for we know that now we are doubly loved and doubly safe. She is Mother and Queen, she combines the tenderness of her affection with the queenly power to obtain all good things for us. Mother and Queen! By those two titles we have a twofold claim on her that God respects, since we are both her children and her subjeéts. With redoubled confidence we can cry to her in our needs of body and of soul: “Show thyself a Mother, and show thyself a Queen; show thy love and show thy power in our regard who trust in thee and belong to thee, entirely, for Christ thy Son.” Is there any wonder that every century and every land has sought to represent her, after its own mo&t perfect conception of the ideal Mother and Queen!

Page 140

    II4 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST Poets, like painters, have delighted in celebrating her under both these attributes. Dante Gabriel Rossetti, though not a Catholic, ethereally and wistfully describes her, far in the dazzling heights of Heaven, and calls upon her to hear our prayers, that as Mother she may incline to us in all her tenderness of love, and as Queen she may assist us in her plenitude of power: “Soul, is it Faith, or Love, or Hope, That lets me see her standing up Where the light of the Throne is bright. Unto the left, unto the right, The cherubim, arrayed, conjoined, Float inward to a golden point, And from between the seraphim, The glory issues for a hymn. O Mary, Mother, be not loth To listen, thou whom the Stars clothe, Who seest and mayst not be seen, Hear us at last, O Mary, Queen! Into our shadows bend thy face, Bowing thee from the secret place, O Mary, Virgin, full of grace!” The illustrious Cardinal Newman gives us quite another picture, more tangible and familiar, in which he conceives of Our Lady exalted as on a pure white throne of ivory and silver, enriched with pearls and every pre 

Page 141

    THE QUEEN MOTHER 15 cious Stone. Yet the heavenly reality itself, as he well understood, is indescribably more rich and beautiful and splendorous than any gems of this dark earth could make it. But the best that he can he would offer to her, since it all redounds solely to the glory of her Divine Son: “Near to the Throne of the Lamb that was slain Sits the Queen of Heaven, the Star of the main: Her throne is of ivory, silver bedight, And with glittering pearls of the ocean is bright; The diamond glows with the emerald sheen, While the ruby and amethyst there are seen. If such be the splendor of Mary’s throne, Encircled by angels, a peerless zone, What must her own perfect beauty be, Dazzling with glorified majesty.” Particularly do artists and poets picture her as in that wonderful vision shown to St. John and narrated in the twelfth chapter of the Apocalypse. Even in the earliest writings of the Church which deal with Mary’s exaltation she is already identified with the Great Woman there beheld by the ApoStle. That the first reference in this passage is to the Church we fully realize, but it is no less generally conceded that the application can with equal right be made to Mary, as we shall later more amply discuss. .

Page 142

    116 THE REIGN OF CHRIST Mrs. Henry Jenner in her delightful book, “Our Lady in Art,” says: “The description of the Apocalypse of the woman clothed with the sun and having the moon under her feet and a crown of Stars, is held to be a description of what might be called the essence of Mary, the consummation of the second Eve, who undoes the work of the first Eve. “Tdealism can go no farther in art than the portraying of this mystery, for the pictures are not of Mary as she was at any one moment of her beautiful girlhood, but Mary, as God’s perfect work, as it exists in His Eternal Conception.” We have thus the close and inseparable association of the second Eve with the second Adam in the great Redemptive work, which implies no less than their close and inseparable relation in Heaven, as King and Queen of glory, understanding, of course always, Mary’s complete dependence on Christ. But as we think of Mary’s glory in Heaven we naturally express it in the words so familiar to us: “Our Immaculate Queen.” The queenship of Mary, like her Motherhood of the Incarnate Word, and like every other prerogative that belongs to her, has its fitting prelude in the Immaculate Conception. To realize more fully, therefore, how becoming to Mary is the queenship God bestowed upon her, we must enter more deeply into the significance of that sublime : : ;

Page 143

    Ceol 1 5 lory of | g eet benediction in the led * A ~~

Page 144

Page 145

    THE QUEEN MOTHER 3. MARY OUR QUEEN IMMACULATE “The foundations thereof are in the holy mountains,” sings the Psalmist. Applying those words to Our Blessed Lady Suarez writes that where the very loftiest heights of grace ever attained by any creature, human or angelical, reach the limits of their sublime altitudes, there the very first grace God ever gave to Mary already rises soaring above them. The soul of Christ alone, of all created beings, outshone her in the splendors of Divine grace. From the first moment of her Immaculate Conception, when her “ascensions” before God began, Mary therefore was already higher in grace than the highest Seraphim, or the sublimest of the saints at the summit of their perfection. Unimaginable to us as that sanctity is we can well realize that it was no less becoming to her who was destined to be the Mother of God’s own Eternal Son, the Queen of angels and of saints. Not even in the first moment of her being was she to be surpassed except by Christ alone, her own Divine Son. We can then but vaguely wonder what must have been that sanctity of Mary at her own supreme development and in the hour of her glorious Assumption into Heaven. 119

Page 146

    120 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST Perhaps this may help us to understand more fully that most transcendent of all tributes which the Church pays to Mary, precisely on the Feast of her Immaculate Conception, and which she never tires of repeating also on other occasions. That tribute is the application to her of the words direétly spoken by the Holy Spirit of Divine Wisdom. In the Epistle for the Mass of the Immaculate Conception; as also at Vespers, Matins and Lauds of the Divine Office for that day, the Church repeats with loying iteration the words of the Book of Proverbs which she applies to her: “The Lord possessed me in the beginning of His ways, before He made anything from the beginning. I was set up from eternity, and of old, before the earth was made. The depths were not as yet, and I was already conceived.” (Prov. viii, 22-24.) In their direct meaning, as I have said, these words obviously are meant to refer to the Eternal Word that in the course of time was to become incarnate in Mary. Yet the Church, while fully acknowledging Mary’s pure creatureship, delights in setting them like a jeweled crown, on the head of our Queen conceived Immaculate. Explaining this act in the very document which defines the dogma of the Immaculate Conception, Pope Pius IX wrote: “These very words with which the Holy Scripture speaks of Uncreated Wisdom and declares its origin in *. % ‘

Page 147

    THE QUEEN MOTHER 121 eternity, the Church is accustomed to use in her ecclesiastical offices and in the sacred liturgy, transferring them to the Virgin whose creation was determined by one and the same decree with the Incarnation of Divine Wisdom.” The Word is the substantial Image of the Father, Light of Light, true God of true God; but Mary is the created image of that Word, reflecting in a purely human way the beauty and glory which are from all eternity. In this sense we therefore can securely speak of her as “the brightness of eternal light, and the unspotted mirror of God’s majesty and the image of His goodness.” Conceived immaculate, she is in truth the reflected brightness of eternal light, without the shadow of sin to mar it; the unspotted mirror of God’s majesty, without one breath of evil to dim it; the image of His goodness, leaving justice in His own hands, but sweetly imaging His mercy, His bounty, and all the richness and the tenderness of the great Love that God poured forth into her heart for us. So, then, in the beginning of His ways the Lord possessed her. Together with the Uncreated Wisdom Mary Immaculate, Mary as Mother, Mary as Queen, is present in the eternal thought of God, “before He made anything from the beginning,” a pure joy in the Heart of the Almighty, a delight to the Most Blessed Trinity beyond the worlds of angels and of men that then were yet to be. And thus, in all truth, the Church can now

Page 148

    T2 ~ THE REIGN OF CHRIST continue to put upon her lips the words: “I was set up from eternity, and of old, before the earth was made. The depths were not as yet, and I was already conceived.” So, united with the Divine Wisdom, as the Mother decreed for the Only-Begotten of the Father, Mary may properly be conceived as present in the thought of her Creator when He enclosed the depths, and established the skies above them, when He poised the fountains of water and balanced the foundations of the earth, “playing before Him at all times, playing in the world.” Thus, whether in the creatureless vast of God’s eternity, or throughout the zons of His Creation, Mary Immaculate was ever present in the Heart of the Triune God, an unfailing joy, a fountain of gladness, a golden song without a discord, a pure delight, a happiness unclouded, a dulcet harmony rejoicing everlastingly the Heart of the Creator despite all that angel might wreck or man might mar in the work of His infinite Love: “IT was with Him, forming all things, and was delighted every day, playing before Him at all times, playing in the world: and my delight is to be with the children of men.” (Prov. viii, 30-31.) Enclosed in the mother love of Mary, beneath the mantle of her intercessory power, we too were present with Almighty God, and so her delight forever will be in the children of men. She is Mother of all who live by grace.

Page 149

    THE QUEEN MOTHER 123 Present with the Eternal before the beginning of days, deStined for creation by one and the same decree that determined the Incarnation of the Divine Wisdom, related in all reality with the Triune God Himself: as daughter with the Everlasting Father, as bride with the Most Holy Spirit, and as “Mother with the Incarnate Word, what less could Mary be than Mistress of Heaven and earth, Queen of angels and of men. It is not to Mary that God owes this, but to Himself. His infinite dignity requires no less. Her Coronation is but His due glory. How unthinkable then would be the thought that even for one instant Mary had been permitted to be the possession of the Evil One, marked by his talons and clouded by the breath of hell, before she finally became the Mother of God; that the Flesh of the All-Holy, drawn from her, should have been contaminated at its very source by sin. In the Strong words of Denis the Carthusian, we cannot but shrink with horror from saying that the woman who was to crush the head of the serpent should first have been crushed by him, and that the Mother of God should herself have been a daughter of Satan. But we know that by his divinely willed greeting the Angel declared her “full of grace,” and that so there could be no stain in her. We know, too, that the eternal enmity, which in the Garden of Paradise God promised should exist between Mary with her Child on the one

Page 150

    I24 * THE REIGN OF CHRIST hand and Satan with his spawn on the other, was to be an enmity absolute and complete, making even the slightest approach of original sin impossible for her. We can therefore understand the rejoicing throughout the Christian world when at last the dogma of the Immaculate Conception was defined by the See of Peter: “We define that the doétrine which declares that the Most Blessed Virgin Mary, in the first inStant of her conception, by a singular grace and privilege granted her by Almighty God, through the merits of Jesus Christ, Saviour of mankind, was preserved from all Stain of original sin, is a doctrine revealed by God, and therefore must be held firmly and constantly by all faithful Christians.”

Page 151

    THE QUEEN MOTHER 4. DISPENSER OF ALL THE KING’S BOUNTIES Between the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin and her Coronation in Heaven all proceeded in a beautiful and Steadily ascending sequence until we find her at the right hand of Christ, her Son, interceding for us and distributing all the graces that come to us from His hands. For she too had participated, although in a secondary and entirely dependent way, in meriting them for us. Beginning her life of grace at the first moment of her conception with a sanctity far surpassing that of the highest Seraph at the Throne of God, she continued it in absolute and perpetual sinlessness, rising in her constant upward flight on the mighty wings of love, until we behold her merged in the light and splendors of God —a creature Still, pure and simple, yet all encompassed in the glory of that Divinity she once bore within her womb and now enfolding her: a Woman clothed with the Sun, the moon beneath her feet, and round her head the circle of twelve Stars, each a lustrous privilege which the Almighty in His love bestowed upon her. Such is Mary, Mother, Queen Immaculate, crowned with stars, as from all eternity God possessed her in His 125

Page 152

    126 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST. Mind, the one creature without Stain or flaw in all our human race. We well understand, as already said, that the apocalyptic piéture of St. John in the first place refers to the Church herself. But it applies no less truly and fully to Mary, whom the Fathers—Strong as that word may seem to be—identify with the Church. We need but remember that the children of the Church are also, without one exception, the children of Mary, and that every grace that comes to us through the Church is beStowed on us through Mary’s intercession. On all this the Fathers of the Church are plain and clear so that there is no mistaking the truth of that sublime position occupied with God by Mary, our Mother and our Queen. By her “‘Fiat,” at the Incarnation she already mothered us all. For in that one moment she accepted, together with the Divine Motherhood, also the entire plan of the Redemption, and all her own part in it. For in every Step of that great work she participated, from the first formation of the Redeemer’s Sacred Body from her own pure and immaculate substance, to the consummation of His Sacrifice on Calvary. Hence again that other Strong word of the Fathers of the Church when they call her causa salutis, “cause of our salvation,” understanding thereby that in a secondary and subordinate, and yet in a true manner, she codperated with Christ in our Redemption. These indeed are great truths.

Page 153

    THE QUEEN MOTHER 127 Mary bore and nurtured the Divine Victim, she presented Him to the Eternal Father, she endured in her heart all the agonies of His Passion, so far as that was possible for her, and so finally she remains the dispenser of all the graces which she codperated with Christ in winning for us. Mary then is Queen, Queen Immaculate, and her hands are filled with the royal bounties of her Son. Every grace that comes to us she now obtains through her intercession as she assisted first to merit it. Such, then, is the teaching of the great Fathers of the Church and of the illustrious Pontiffs of our own later days. Christ alone is the Redeemer, the Mediator with the Father, but Mary is His helper, codperator, administra, so that in the magnificent language of Pope Leo XIII: “She who had been the codperator in the sacrament of man’s Redemption, might also be the codperator in the grace derived from Him throughout all time.” (Adjatricem Popult.) Mary is Queen, at the right of the King, dealing out with truly queenly munificence the boundless riches she obtains for us. They were won with her aid, they are distributed through her love. For, says the same great Pontiff, “nothing, God so wishing it, is granted us, save through Mary.” What a glorious vision, then, unfolds itself before our eyes as we Stand at the vantage point of eternity and see, as we can feebly imagine it, in the Eternal Mind of

Page 154

    128 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST God, all these glories, all these privileges, all this grandeur, all this wealth of tenderness and beauty, all this world of goodness and grace that is Mary—and all flowering forth out of the one great primal grace of the Immaculate Conception! But how can we appreciate what this in reality means for us! Through the decree of the Immaculate Conception, eternally ordained by God, we behold as through an arch of gold the great vista of the glory destined for us and all mankind. Through it we see the everlasting triumph of the saints in that Kingdom thrown open to us by His victory over sin and death whose very coming was conditioned on the Immaculate Conception. Yet the first fruit of His precious Passion and Death was the Immaculate Conception itself of Mary, preserved from every Stain of original sin through the foreseen merits of her Divine Son, Jesus Christ, both her Child and her Redeemer. : So with the Incarnation was decreed the Immaculate Conception, and through the Immaculate Conception came to us a Mother and a Saviour—and with them all our bliss! What wonders then, within a wonder, is the Immaculate Conception! What love and what confidence should it imply in our hearts for her who is the Mother of God, Our Mother and Our Queen!

Page 155

Page 156

    The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.78% accurate
    i rl a aa —* 4 , md oe ae aia eo. as! Sy ay tits © a

Page 157

    THE REASON FOR ST. JOSEPH’S POWER F. Albani

Page 158

Page 159

    nay eee’ ee ee eee guias® » Ty ie owe ee THE GREAT PATRON 1. JOSEPH’S POWER AND EXALTATION . ARY is Queen Mother at the court of the celestial King, her Divine Son and Saviour, but Joseph is our special Patron at His Throne. The dignity, power and unspeakable exaltation of this Saint in Christ’s Kingdom we find beautifully prefigured in the position occupied at the court of Pharaoh by Joseph of Egypt. Yet what, in the eyes of faith, are all the vanished splendors of the mightiest of Egyptian monarchs compared with the eternal reign of that Divine King before whom Joseph holds his lofty rank! For a true understanding of Joseph’s relationship to Jesus and Mary, and therefore of his sublime dignity, we need but turn to the pages of the Sacred Scriptures as these are illumined in the light cast on them by the Fathers of the Church. But the power of Joseph is made still more apparent by his relationship also to the Kingdom of Christ here upon earth. We recall that solemn act of the Vicar of Christ proclaiming the Spouse of Mary and FosterFather of Our Lord, Patron of the Universal Church, Christ’s Kingdom on this earth. 131

Page 160

    132 ‘ THE REIGN OF CHRIST And Still more has the Church done to indicate the power of Joseph. Not merely does she present him to us as holding a position of trust over Christ’s spiritual Empire here below similar to that conferred on the Egyptian Joseph over the regions watered by the Nile, but she continually repeats to us, in a far more significant way than when used of old, the words of Pharaoh to his subjects in their need: “‘Go to Joseph.” In discussing, therefore, Christ’s Kingdom and Dominion nothing can be more appropriate and impor: tant than to consider also, after Mary’s queenship, the position occupied in the Messianic Kingdom by that great Saint who himself was of kingly line, Joseph, the princely scion of the royal house of David, the faithful Proteétor and watchful Guardian of the promised Ruler, who was to reign in the house of Jacob forever and of whose Kingdom there would be no end. Devotion to St. Joseph is truly a Scriptural devotion. It is based entirely on the inspired word of God. The Holy Spirit is the first promoter of the veneration which the Church gives to this great Patriarch and Saint, who is the golden link between the Old TeStament and the New. To arouse within our hearts that love for St. Joseph which every Christian should seek to foster, and which the Church so eagerly desires of us, we need search no further than the pages of Holy Writ. In them we behold him standing forth as the elect of

Page 161

    THE GREAT PATRON 133 God, a man of angelic chastity, of perfect justice and of unswerving faith, to whom the two most precious treasures of Heaven were entrusted. There we behold him, exalted to the sublime dignity of head of the Holy Family, representing for Jesus the shadow of the Eternal Father, and for Mary the most chaste reflection of the Divine purity of her invisible Spouse, the Holy Ghost. With gentle sway he ruled over Him whom all creation must obey, and lovingly trained to humble toil the willing hands of that Divine Worker by whose omnipotence the universe was fashioned. Then, when the long day’s work was done and the sun sank in the blazing west, Mary, with true wife’s tender care, ministered to him in the sweet affection of her own devoted love. Who ever Stood in such familiar relations with the King of kings or was linked in so close a bond to her who is the Queen of angels and of men? And let us remember that even then those very titles, though not used by Christ and Mary, in all truth belonged to them, for they were based on the MyStery of the Incarnation. How wonderful in this light the réle played by that kingly scion, Joseph, in the lowly home of Nazareth, which was at the same time a royal court of Heaven where angels worshiped invisibly! To Joseph as well as to Mary an angel committed the function of exercising a parent’s right in giving the name of Jesus, “Saviour,” to the Divine Child. But to Joseph alone, as supreme authority and ruler of that home of

Page 162

    134 THE REIGN OF CHRIST all holiness, the angelic messenger was sent to make known the will of Heaven regarding the Child and His Mother: “Arise, and take the Child and His Mother and fly into Egypt, and be there until I shall call thee.” (Matt. 1i, 13.) So here again we behold him beautifully prefigured by that Joseph of Egypt who under Heaven’s guidance preserved for the people of Pharaoh and for his own brethren the grain that saved them in the days of famine. Yet far more than all this did Joseph when at the Angel’s bidding he fled with the Divine Child and His Mother to rescue the Saviour King. Not for one country, nor for one time only, but for all the world and for all generations, for Christ’s universal Kingdom to the end of time, he preserved the true Bread of Life, which in the Eucharist is our food unto life eternal. Perhaps the fullest revelation of the tender intimacy existing in that Holy Family is given us in the Gospel record of those words of Mary when, after long and heart-breaking search, the parents of Jesus at last found the Divine Child in the Temple: “Son, why hast Thou done so to us? Behold, Thy father and I have sought Thee sorrowing.” (Luke ii, 48.) Christ, who both before and after this event was completely subject to Joseph and to Mary, had on this occasion carried out a special dispensation of the Eternal Father. His aétion, as we know, was meant for all time to come, as a lesson in vocation. But it is not to this fa¢t I wish here to allude,

Page 163

    THE GREAT PATRON 135 but to the light cast by the words of Mary on the relations existing in the Holy Family itself. “Son!” By this name both parents, evidently called Christ. For Mary immediately adds: “Thy father and I,” referring to St. Joseph, who therefore was simply called by the tender name of “Father.” This conforms, too, with the Scripture usage of calling Joseph and Mary “the parents” of Jesus. That Mary conceived of the Holy Ghost alone the Scripture makes perfectly clear, but nevertheless Joseph was truly entitled to the name of “Father.” We here touch on a profound truth which should be carefully pondered and understood, and which redounds unspeakably to the glory of St. Joseph. Indeed it helps us to realize, as nothing else could, the position of Joseph in relation to the Divine King, and the high place occupied by him in the Kingdom of Christ on earth. It enables us even to glimpse in some faint way the vision of that glory which will be his forever in the Kingdom Triumphant of his Divine “Son.” We may well, therefore, consider here in some detail the faét of Joseph’s relation to the Eternal King.

Page 164

Page 165

    THE GREAT PATRON 2. JOSEPH’S RELATION TO CHRIST THE KING Although we are accustomed to refer to St. Joseph as the FoSter-Father of Jesus, which is entirely correét, yet it must not be thought that therefore he was only an assumptive, or adoptive, or even a merely legal father of Jesus; for this would be entirely untrue. He did not adopt Jesus, but Jesus was given to him by the Holy Ghost, as his true Son, not according to the flesh but according to the spirit. Joseph was both the legal father and juridically the natural father of Jesus, whom Christ was bound to obey according to the law of nature, since He truly belonged to Joseph within a natural and perfect marriage. To the same effect St. Augustine says of the marriage of Joseph and Mary: “Because of this inviolate union both deserved to be called the parents of Christ, so that not Mary only was Mother, but Joseph also was father of Christ, being the husband of the Mother of Christ. Yet both these funétions were his in mind and not in the flesh.” (De nupt. et concup., I, 11.) Let us note how the same great luminary of the Church, St. Augustine, further clarifies this truth: 137

Page 166

    138 | ‘THE REIGN OF CHRIST “What the Holy Spirit wrought, He wrought for both, namely for Mary and Joseph. . . . Resting in the justice of both, He gave unto both a Son. . . . Wherefore Joseph was all the more truly a father, as he was more chastely a father. . . . Not from the seed of Joseph did the Lord come, although so it was thought, and yet none the less to the fidelity and love of Joseph a Son was born of Mary.” (Serm. 51.) There, then, we have the substance of it all. The marriage of Joseph and Mary was ordained by God that within it might be born the Incarnate Word of God, Christ, the Immortal King of Ages. Let us sum up, then, what has here been said. Although conceived by Mary only, of the Holy Ghost, the Divine Son nevertheless belonged to Joseph also, being born in his wedded union. Both were truly the parents of Jesus, and He acknowledged this fact by being subject alike to both. ““Wherefore,” St. Augustine well concludes, “Joseph was all the more truly a father as he was more chastely a father.” Now let us Strive to realize what follows from the great truth of Joseph’s fatherhood of Chris. It means that Joseph, with Mary, was lifted up into a sphere entirely apart from all others, inaccessibly exalted even above the sublime dignity of the Apostles or the highest soarings of the angelic hierarchies. The seven Spirits before the Throne cannot draw so close to God. In a word, Joseph was thus elevated into the very order

Page 167

    ASS THE GREAT PATRON 139 of the Hypostatic Union, that order which draws its supereminent excellence from the union of the Divine Word with our human nature. Three persons only are included in this sublimes of all orders: Jesus, Mary, Joseph. Together they constitute what has often been called the “Earthly Trinity,” which through Christ, as God and Man, is linked direétly with the Eternal Trinity of Heaven. With this said, all is said. We can conceive nothing higher regarding the unimaginable dignity of Joseph, whose relationship is with the Immaculate Mother of God, and with the Eternal Son of God. And this relationship is true and real, exalting him with Mary to that dazzling nearness to God in which we have beheld him. After these faéts have been fully grasped we surely need search no farther to eStablish St. Joseph’s intimate relations to the Kingship and Kingdom of Christ. Yet a brief reference at least should be made here to his own personal sanctity. To enter into details on this vast subject would be impossible, but there is one general rule whereby we can safely measure the height of holiness to which Joseph was lifted up. It is a rule universally acknowledged in the schools, and which St. Bernardine of Sienna thus briefly sets forth for us: “The general rule for every single grace accorded any rational creature is that, wheresoever the Divine Bounty chooses some one for a particular and exceptional grace,

Page 168

    140 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST or for some sublime State, it also endows him with all the gifts necessary for the fulfilment of his functions, and enriches him superabundantly.” By this rule, therefore, we are to measure, if we can, the sanétity that would be required superabundantly to fit St. Joseph for the incomprehensible dignity and the sublime duties accorded him in his intimate relation to Christ the King and as linked in the bonds of true matrimony with Mary, the Queen of all the world and Mistress of the angels. By this rule we may try at least to ascertain in some degree what was the fidelity, the purity, the meekness and humility, and the sum of all the other virtues hidden under the silence of that wonderful Saint from whose lips the Sacred Scriptures record no single word, but whose life was filled with action, prayer, self-oblation, and complete devotion to the service of Jesus and of Mary, until at length it was wholly consumed with its ardor of Divine love. How keen must have been that fire of love kindled in the heart of Joseph, and mingling forevermore with the love that burned in the Hearts of Jesus and of Mary, less brilliant only than the ardor of these flames and blending forever in one brightness with them!

Page 169

    id \ v THE GREAT PATRON a: PATRON OVER ALL CHRIST’S KINGDOM Here, then, we come in a more special way to St. Joseph’s function in the Kingdom of Christ, God’s Holy Church. The providential mission of this great and many-sided Saint was not only the care and guardianship of the Holy Family on earth; but the same fatherly solicitude was to be exercised by him also in our own regard, as our Patron in Heaven. For that reason God gave him a heart large enough in its love to enclose and father all. As children of the Church, members of Christ’s Mystic Body, we naturally turn for protection to him under whose guardianship Jesus Himself had been placed. As children of Mary, we feel that we too may like Christ rely on Joseph, as a father who will never forsake us and of whose help we can always rest assured. Finally, nothing in the Kingdom of Christ on earth can be indifferent to him who so faithfully cherished and preserved the Divine King. He is indeed the mighty advocate for us with Mary and with Christ. All this the Church teaches us by ceaselessly applying to him the words already quoted at the beginning of this section: “Go to Joseph.” I4I

Page 170

    142 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST By typically referring these words to the great FosterFather of Our Saviour, the Patron set over Christ’s universal Kingdom, the Church implies that in following her counsel we can confidently count on St. Joseph’s help. Her direétion, so clearly given, cannot leave us disappointed. ‘“‘Go to Joseph,” spoken on her part, connotes no less plainly the obvious conclusion: “And he will aid you.” Of that aid let us have no doubt. Into the hands of Joseph of Egypt were placed all the keys to the granaries of Pharaoh, but into the hands of our own St. Joseph are given the keys to the treasuries of Heaven. Nothing can be denied him by the King, his Divine “Son,” while Mary, the sole dispenser of all Christ’s graces, will add her intercession to whatever Joseph may desire. ““Thy father and I,” is the appeal she will again make with him to Christ in those words of long ago. Nothing, then, can be refused to Joseph. But neither, let it be understood, can he ask anything for us that would not be pleasing to the Heart of the celestial King. Safely can we place into his hands ourselves, our interests, and all that is dear to us here below or in the life to come. Not for himself alone was St. Joseph exalted to that inconceivable height, where with Mary he is included in the order of the Hypostatic Union, but for ourselves also, and for all Christ’s Kingdom on this earth. How could the Holy See have better expressed its ap 

Page 171

    THE GREAT PATRON 143 preciation of this great truth than by declaring him Patron of the Universal Church and instituting in his honor the special Feast of the Solemnity of St. Joseph? Thus forevermore, by the voice of her Sovereign Pontiff, the Church has placed herself and all her faa under his protection. We can readily understand, therefore, why with such insistence she would have us turn to Joseph and exhorts us to love him, imitate him and confide in him. “‘We are exceedingly concerned,” wrote Pope Leo XIII, “that this devotion Strike deep root in the life and habits of the Faithful.” It need hardly be said that devotion to St. Joseph blends and harmonizes admirably with every form of devotion to Jesus and Mary. Going to Joseph we infallibly are brought to Jesus and Mary. So, too, devotion to him need not interfere with affection for our other heavenly patrons, whom we have learned to love and trust, as especially dear and near to us; nor least of all with that tender reverence and obedience we constantly owe to our own Guardian Angel, ever at our side. Devotion to St. Joseph may indeed greatly strengthen all these other bonds. As children of Mary, brothers of Jesus, members of Christ’s Mystic Body, entirely entrusted to St. Joseph’s Patronage, we are dear to him under many titles and he loves us with a manifold love. Let us, therefore, confidently go to him, knowing that he will take us

Page 172

    144 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST also to his great tender, fatherly heart, where Mary found her solace and the Christ Child sweetly rested, safe from every harm. Not merely is the entire Kingdom of Christ on earth placed under Joseph’s Patronage, but there is no State, age, or condition of life in which St. Joseph is not the fitting Patron. He touched on our human existence in all its phases. He was a scion of kings and yet a humble laborer; he was a protector of childhood, womanhood, virginity; he was a model and patron of family life, no less than of the priesthood and the Religious State. He is the special patron of the interior life and of all souls who aim after holiness. But his interest is no less intense in helping to bring back to God the fallen, the outcast and the wanderers from Heaven’s grace. Nothing so urges him as to restore all mankind to the Mother Heart of Mary and to the loving Heart of Christ, to make them all one in Jesus, that they may be one in God. There is no one who cannot call on him as a special patron, confide in him as a tender father, and love him as the one most near to Jesus and to Mary. There is no one who cannot copy the wisdom of St. Teresa, when she says: “I took St. Joseph for my patron and advocate, and I recommend myself unceasingly to his proteétion. I do not remember ever to have asked anything of him that I did not obtain. . . . St. Joseph assists us in every need.”

Page 173

Page 174

Page 175

    E KING TH SOE

Page 176

Page 177

    SACRED HEART AND ST. MARGARET MARY A Religious of the Sacred Heart

Page 178

Page 179

    THE HEART OF THE KING 1. REIGN OF THE SACRED HEART FORETOLD 4 ITH the institution of the Feast of Christ the King, and its annual celebration, culminat' ing always in the consecration of the entire human race to the Sacred Heart, the time has come for a renewed consideration of those remarkable revelations made to St. Margaret Mary, in her last days, regarding the social reign of the Sacred Heart. They are recorded in three letters written by her the year before her death. These documents were left unmentioned by her contemporaries. They were in fact ignored or entirely forgotten until re-discovered in modern times. Writing in 1874, Mgr. Bougaud compares them to those mysterious pages whose messages are traced with invisible characters that Stand out only when held to the flame. The fires of revolution, he observes, were needed to direct men to the obscurity of the archives where these documents lay hidden, and to render their revelations legible to all. It is true, indeed, that reference to the future reign of the Sacred Heart was already made in the very first year of the so-called Great Revelations, beginning in 1673. But its social nature was not as yet Stressed. 149

Page 180

    150 THE REIGN OF CHRIST “This is the last effort of My love once more to save the world,” Our Lord then said to St. Margaret Mary, disclosing His Sacred Heart to her. “By This I must reign. Yes, My Divine Heart shall reign!” But it was only at the very end of her life, in 1689, the year preceding her death, that the message of the reign of the Sacred Heart, in a distinctively social, national and even universal sense, was expressed by the Saint. Although of far more than merely national application, this message contained many things dire¢tly and immediately bearing upon Louis XIV and his court. Our Lord’s command to communicate them caused the Saint no little violence, as she herself States: “I should never have resolved to do so, had He not made known to me that it was for the interest of His glory, and for that I should cheerfully sacrifice millions of lives, if I had them.” It is of course in no way surprising that a mystic, secluded from the world and earthly interests, should be entrusted with a message to royalty, or even thrust into the very midst of secular turmoils. To the mystic Catharine of Sienna secular rulers came to receive counsel. Florence was reconciled by her to the Holy See and the Popes brought back from Avignon in despite of the bitterest opposition. To the mystic Joan of Arc the Voices spoke when she had reached her thirteenth year, and before long she found herself in camps and battles, until she Stood with lifted Standard viewing the achievement

Page 181

    THE HEART OF THE KING I51 of her task in the crowning of Charles VII at Rheims. To the mystic Teresa of Avila was given the occasion to address Philip II, who lent her his support, and we Still possess her correspondence with that King. So, then, we need not wonder that to the mystic Margaret Mary was assigned the duty of setting forth to Louis XIV and his court the sublime designs of the Sacred Heart. That mission failed, but through no fault of hers. Had it succeeded the whole course of modern history would doubtless have been entirely different from what it proved to be. Yet her message was not written in vain. It is full of encouragement and significance for us, particularly at the present time. The first of the three letters to which I have referred was dated February 23, 1689, and addressed to Mother de Saumaise. Its import is quite general. But a social and national note is Struck at once when she says that not only do those who promote devotion to the Sacred Heart win for themselves “the friendship and eternal benedictions of this lovable Heart,” but that they secure “a powerful protection for our country.” One thing, however, Stands out clearly: it is her absolute certainty of the future reign of the Sacred Heart. “The Sacred Heart,” she writes, “will reign in spite of Satan and all who may rise to oppose It.” And again, in her second letter, she says: “It will reign, this lovable

Page 182

    152 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST Heart, in spite of Satan, his imps and his agents. That word transports me with joy.” The final reign of the Sacred Heart on earth is thus not left to human contingency, but merely the time or manner of its fulfilment is left undefined. But she goes further and demands in particular now that this Heart should rule in the palaces of those possessed of power in this world. These naturally were then the kings and princes of that day. But her message was direétly to Louis XIV only. The example given by him would be most far-reaching in its influence. Not only is the King “to have an edifice ereéted in which shall be a picture of the Divine Heart where the consecration and homage of the King and his entire court can be received,”’ but he is to have the Mass of the Sacred Heart authorized by the Holy See and “‘to obtain all the other privileges which ought to accompany devotion to this Divine Heart.” Pére de la Chaise, the King’s confessor, is definitely named by the Saint as the person best suited to reach the ear of Louis XIV, although the great difficulties he will encounter through Satan’s opposition are not disguised. In fine we are prudently re-~ minded that God can indeed “effeét all that He pleases, though He does not always do so, not wishing to do violence to man’s will.” In that last sentence we may well find the ultimate reason why all these designs, so far as the King was concerned, failed of execution. We have only inferences to

Page 183

    THE HEART OF THE KING 153 guide us, but from these it is thought likely that the Saint’s message reached the King, that he believed it to be authentic, that he even gave it serious thought, but nothing happened in the event. For the rest the scandals of the King’s life are but too well known to us. Thus with the brilliant reign of Louis XIV began the decline that ended with Voltaire, Robespierre and Marat. The three letters of St. Margaret Mary, calling for the public, social, national reign of the Sacred Heart, were written in 1689. That date, Mgr. Bougaud points out, recalls another precisely one century later, 1789, “‘the epoch in which arose the Storm that was to sweep away the monarchy, and with it all other monarchies.” Yet amid the crashing of thrones and the hapless fate of earthly monarchs, the promise that Christ had made to St. Margaret Mary still remained: “Yes, My Divine Heart shall reign!” Devotion to the Sacred Heart triumphed over Jansenism; it Struggled through the dark years of heresy and infidelity, and today, at Montmartre, stands the national monument to the Sacred Heart that Louis XIV should have erected. But there is much more to tell. It was in 1899 that the great epoch-making event took place of the final dedication of the entire world— Catholic, Protestant, Jew and Infidel—to the Sacred Heart of Christ. Not merely a national, but a worldwide reign of that Heart was here proclaimed.

Page 184

Page 185

    THE HEART OF THE KING 2. “IN THIS SIGN CONQUER” “T am about to perform the greatest act of my pontificate,”’ were the words with which Pope Leo XIII announced his intention of consecrating the world to the Sacred Heart. He felt that in this aétion he was undertaking something of far higher significance, even from a social point of view, than anything hitherto accomplished by him during the long and glorious reign then. drawing to its close. In the devotion to the Divine Heart, and the consecration of mankind to this center of Christian love and unity, he beheld an assurance of future conquests no less splendid than the triumphs of the victorious Constantine with which a new era of freedom opened for the Church. In whatever light historians may view the vision of that resplendent cross in the heavens, which tradition records appeared to Constantine on the eve of his decisive battle, bearing the inscription, “In This Sign Conquer,” we know without doubt of the subsequent triumphs of the cross that led the way to victory for the Church. What that symbol meant to the newly liberated Church, Pope Leo XIII fearlessly stated in his great En155

Page 186

    156 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST cyclical ““On the Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart,” the flaming emblem of this Divine Heart, surmounted with the cross and wreathed with the crown of thorns, must mean for us in our own day of battle and of spiritual conquest. Before that radiant sign of salvation the ancient idolatry was at last forced back, slowly but surely, into the darkness out of which it had come. With broken ranks . and trailing banners it sank back before a supernatural power with which it could not cope. So we may confidently trust that the new paganism which again has overspread the earth will in these latter days at length © be forced to recede before the invincible advance of the Standard divinely given into our hands—the golden oriflamme which bears the symbol of the Sacred Heart, the emblem of the Love of Christ, slighted and ignored by men. But let us hear the very words of the illustrious Pontiff who first pressed into our hands that Standard and bade us march on with it to victory over all our spiritual foes. “At an epoch,” wrote the Holy Father, “when the Church, still close to its beginnings, was bowed down beneath the yoke of the Czsars, a youthful Emperor saw in the heavens the sign of a cross, which announced to him and prepared a glorious victory soon to follow. This day behold there appears before our eyes another emblem, prophetic of blessings and all Divine, the most Sacred

Page 187

    THE HEART OF THE KING 157 Heart of Jesus, surmounted by the cross, and burning with a splendor of glory in the midst of flame. In this we mutt place all our hope, of this we must ask and expect the salvation of mankind.” (May 25, 1899.) We understand, therefore, the importance attached in the mind of the Sovereign Pontiff to this consecration, _an event such as had never before taken place. It implied no less than the dedication of all classes, nations and individuals, irrespective of creeds, to the Sacred Heart. The result of this supreme aét of the Pontificate of Pope Leo XIII the world has already experienced, and nowhere perhaps more evidently than in the decrees on “Frequent and Daily Communion,” and on the “Early Communion of Children.”’ Devotion to the Sacred Heart is ever most intimately associated with the frequent and fervent reception of the Holy Eucharist and with an ‘ ardent attraction to the Sacred Presence in the Tabernacle. So, too, the very battle cry with which the Church, under Pope Pius X advanced to the spiritual conquest of the world—“To renew all things in Christ!’”—was inspired by the zeal that flamed in the Heart of the Saviour. The casting forth of Modernism from the bosom of the Church, where viper-like it had nestled, meaning to infliGt its deadly Sting, was another manifestation of the love and power of the Sacred Heart under whose aegis all mankind had now been placed.

Page 188

    158 THE REIGN OF CHRIST But we must not forget here, as I need but say in passing, that it was through Mary that the reign of Christ and of His Sacred Heart was to be ushered into the world. As His first coming had been through her, so every grace continues to flow to us through Mary’s hands. It was really with the declaration of the Dogma of the Immaculate Conception that the great advance began, and the consecration of the entire human race to the Sacred Heart was itself a magnificent culmination of this Providential movement. While the legions and principalities of darkness are continuing their wonted work of inciting to greed, sensuality and infidelity among rich and poor alike; while Protestantism is daily drifting farther from the first essential of Christianity, belief in the Divinity of Christ as the Incarnate Son of God; while the seéts amid their countless bewildering contradictions and divergencies are vainly seeking for unity away from the only center of unity which Christ Himself has eStablished, we behold the Catholic Church shine forth in all her glory, the city built upon the mountain to which the eyes of all the world are turned in wonder and expectation. Truly a sublime thought was the Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart—a Divine thought: for it had its origin not in the mind of man but in the Heart of Christ Itself. The direct occasion, in fat, which led to this Consecration was the revelations regarding it, claimed to have been received by a saintly Religious,

Page 189

    THE HEART OF THE KING 159 hidden away from the world and unknown to it, like St. Margaret Mary. Yet it was the desire of the Holy Father that an act of such. importance should rest upon the teachings of theology and tradition, and not upon the private message which had first inspired it. He, therefore, confided the inquiry into this question to the Jesuit Cardinal Mazella. The answer he received was clear and convincing. It was drawn from the pages of Saint Thomas. In speaking of Christ’s Kingdom, the Angelic Doctor distinguishes between two classes of men: those who submit to the sovereignty of Christ out of obedience, guantum ad executionem potestatis; and those who belong to His dominion out of its inevitableness, quantum ad potestatem. The latter, though not of His Fold, though perhaps equally ignorant of Him and of His Church, are, nevertheless, His subjects. All must obey His will and enter the Catholic Fold when once they recognize it as truly the one and only Church of Christ, His Kingdom upon earth. All human beings, irrespective of what may be their creed, can be offered up to the Sacred Heart, dedicated and consecrated to It. By this act a new bond has been formed, binding them more closely to the one Divine center of all-saving grace and mercy.

Page 190

Page 191

    THE HEART OF THE KING 3. CONSECRATION OF WORLD TO SACRED HEART The circumstances that impelled Pope Leo XIII to ordain for the Universal Church the great Act of the Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart, deserve to be recalled to mind once more, particularly at the present moment when we are already reaping its plentiful benefits. The initiative for this step was given to the Supreme Pontiff by a Good Shepherd nun, Sister Mary of the Divine Heart, in a small convent, in a remote little town of Portugal. In recording her “revelations,” which were the undoubted occasion of bringing about this remarkable event, I must first, however, protest, in accordance with the decree of Pope Urban VIII, that it is not my purpose to anticipate in any way the judgment of the Church regarding their authenticity, nor in any other way to forestall the Church’s pronouncements concerning the person in question. Yet the unusual significance of what, under these restrictions, I shall call her revelations, lies in the fact that the message based on them was evidently received by Pope Leo XIII as the 161

Page 192

    162 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST expression to him of the Divine Will. Thus, in all truth, Sister Mary of the Divine Heart became God’s instrument for the accomplishment of the Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart. By a wonderful dispensation of Providence her entire life was summed up in this single work. All that had preceded it was for her a long and faithful preparation for this one purpose, still unknown to her. With its attainment came likewise the end of her earthly career. On June 9, 1899, the Feast of the Sacred Heart, and the opening of the solemn triduum preceding the consecration of mankind to that Divine Heart, when her own part in the design of God had been completely accomplished, our Lord called her to Himself. Her sufferings, her sacrifices, her fidelity had been, as it would seem, the conditions on which the Divine Will had made dependent the fulfilment of Its designs. Thus purified in the fires of charity, she was made fit to become the intermediary between Christ and His Vicar upon earth. Her first letter, written to Rome in obedience to the Divine command, was left entirely unnoticed; she had done her duty and was satisfied. Her second letter, written a year later, in answer to a renewed revelation and at the cost of intense sufferings, deeply moved the Sovereign Pontiff, but again no reply was granted. Finally, as the will of the Sacred Heart was once more made manifest to her, the third message was prepared,

Page 193

    THE HEART OF THE KING 163 and signed by her with trembling hand. This time, however, even before her letter had left the little town of Oporto, in Portugal, where from her bed of suffering she was directing a convent of Good Shepherd nuns, Sister Mary of the Divine Heart knew that her mission was fulfilled and that the great object of her life was now to be accomplished. In spite of the silence which had followed her previous letters she henceforth had no doubt that her prayers were answered and the Consecration of Mankind to the Sacred Heart would be no longer delayed. As an incentive to our own zeal in promoting with all our strength and fervor the conversion of the world and the coming of God’s Kingdom upon earth, it may be well to quote here a passage from this last letter which so deeply impressed the Sovereign Pontiff to whom it was directed. It will also best explain both the nature and purpose of that Consecration which has created for us a new bond of brotherhood with all mankind, the brotherhood in the Sacred Heart. Her own words follow: “On the eve of the Immaculate Conception, Our Lord made me understand that by this new development of the devotion to His Divine Heart He will illuminate the entire world with fresh light. The words of the third Mass of Christmas Day penetrated my heart: ‘For this day a great light hath descended upon earth.’ “T seemed (interiorly) to behold rays streaming down

Page 194

    164 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST from this light, this adorable Sun, the Heart of Jesus. Its rays were shed upon the earth, in a faint manner at first, then more and more brightly, until the whole world was illuminated. And He said: ‘People and all nations shall be enlightened with the brightness of this light, and warmed by the intense heat of its rays.’ “T understood the ardent desire He had that His Adorable Heart should be glorified ever more and more, and better known; and that its gifts and blessings should be spread over all the world. He has chosen your Holiness, and prolonged your days in order that you may now give Him this honor and may console His outraged Heart, the source of all grace, the abode of peace and happiness. I feel unworthy to communicate all this to your Holiness; but our Lord, after impressing me ever more profoundly with a sense of my own misery, and making me renew the sacrifice of myself as victim and spouse of His Heart, with the willing acceptance by me of all kinds of sufferings, humiliation and contempt, gave me Striét order to write to your Holiness on this subject. “Tt may seem Strange that our Lord should ask for the consecration of the whole world, and not be satisfied with the consecration of the Catholic Church. But His desire to reign, to be loved and glorified, and to inflame all hearts with His love and mercy, is so intense that He wills that your Holiness should offer Him the hearts of all those without the Fold, who by holy Baptism belong to Him, in order to facilitate their return to the true

Page 195

    THE HEART OF THE KING 165 Church; and that you should hasten the spiritual birth of those others still unbaptized, who have not as yet been made partakers of the supernatural life, but for whom no less He sacrificed His life and shed His Blood, who therefore are likewise called by Him to be one day children of Holy Church.” The letter reached the Vatican, January 15, 1899, and the Holy Father, after due inquiry, decided that the solemn consecration should take place in the following year. But on March 1, the eve of his ninetieth birthday, a serious illness necessitated an operation, which was performed with marvelous success. In this crisis Our Lord consoled His faithful spouse with the assurance that the ancient Pontifi’s life should be preserved, “in order that the desires of His heart should be accomplished.” Rome now delayed no longer, and with unwonted rapidity the decree was published which ordered a solemn triduum, preparatory to the Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart, to be begun on June g, 1899, in all the churches throughout the entire world. “Trust in Me,” Our Lord had promised St. Margaret Mary, “My Heart shall reign, My Heart shall triumph.” We are living in the dawn of that day of victory, and our ensign is the banner of the Sacred Heart. In this sign conquer!

Page 196

Page 197

Page 198

Page 199

    CHRIST REIGNING FROM THE CROSS A Religious of the Sacred Heart

Page 200

Page 201

    . . ee my : bs ete. — -! ‘ Vex! THE ROYAL SERVICE 1. THE FEAST OF CHRIST THE KING Ts first Act of Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart took place, as we have seen, in the year 1899. More than two hundred years had then passed since the appearance of Christ to St. Margaret Mary and His message to her that His Sacred Heart must reign. Another quarter of a century now elapsed, and on December 11, 1925, Pope Pius XI issued his important Encyclical on the Establishment of the Feast of Our Lord Jesus Christ as King, to be celebrated every year on the last Sunday of the month of Oétober. At the same time he commanded also “that on this same day, each year, be renewed the Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, which our Predecessor, Pius X of holy memory, ordered to be repeated each year.” And which Leo XIII had first prescribed to be made over all the world. A few slight changes, entirely non-essential, were made in the original Act to meet our present needs more perfeétly. Thus revised it is to continue permanently and will be recited each year, in all the churches, on the Feast 169

Page 202

    170 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST of Christ the King. The Aét itself will be found in the following section. While, therefore, the Encyclical of Pope Pius XI eStablishes firmly the regal authority of Christ over all mankind, and the Feast of Christ the King honors with due liturgical solemnity His royal dignity, the Consecration itself of the entire human race is in reality made to the Sacred Heart of Christ the King, as Leo XIII and Pius X had previously ordained. Interpreting this action of the Holy See we find a complete harmony in the various ordinations. The purpose of the successive Sovereign Pontiffs has been ever the same; to consecrate all mankind to the Entire Person of Our Lord Jesus Christ, but under the special aspect of that Love wherewith His Heart is consumed for us. Thus it is to Christ, with the Sacred Heart flaming in His breast and the crown of Royalty set upon His brow, that we cry out: “Be Thou King!” “Be Thou King, not only of the Faithful who have never forsaken Thee, but also of the prodigal children who have abandoned Thee, and grant that they may quickly return to their Father’s house. Be Thou King of those who are deceived by erroneous opinion, or whom discord holds aloof, and call them back to the harbor of truth and unity of faith, so that soon there may be but one Flock and one Shepherd.” And next we continue, with the Church, to pray also for the Idolater and the Ismaelite; while for the Jews

Page 203

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 171 we ask that the Blood of the Divine Saviour, invoked of old upon their head, may now descend on them as “a laver of redemption and of life.” Then comes the great climax: “Grant, O Lord, to Thy Church, assurance of freedom and immunity from harm; give peace and order to all nations, and make the earth resound from pole to pole with one cry: Praise to the Divine Heart that wrought our salvation, to it be glory and honor forever. Amen.” The supreme purpose, therefore, of the Church in eStablishing the Feast of Our Lord Jesus Christ as King was the return of the nations to the sovereign love and sway of their Divine Saviour. They were to be taught that not only had they been purchased by Christ at the price of His Precious Blood, but that of His very nature He cannot but rule over them, since from the very moment of His conception He is King of kings and Lord of lords. On the truth that “the Incarnate Word is consubstantial with the Father,”’ wrote Pius Xi in his great Encyclical, “rests, as on its foundation, the Empire of the same Christ over all peoples.” He is King of the individual soul, King of the family circle, King of society in its every phase whether civil, social, industrial, commercial or educational. He is King of nations, singly and in their relations with one another. In a word, He is King of all the earth, King of all mankind, King of Protestant, Jew and Infidel no less than of

Page 204

    172 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST the hundreds of millions of faithful Catholics acclaiming His Kingship throughout the world. These, then, are the faéts which the Feast of Christ the King was to bring home to individuals and to society, to masses and classes, to citizen and ruler. How could the ceremonials of the Church be better employed, her pulpit, press and school be made to serve a higher purpose, than in convincing the world of these truths and in procuring for Christ the honor and service due to Him as Universal King of mankind? Who, indeed, is not stirred with a new pulsing and throbbing of loyalty in his heart at the approach of the Feast of Our Lord Jesus Christ as King? There is something like martial music in the very words that make us long to fall in rank for the spiritual conquest of the world for Him. Well may we wish that the time might come when wars would be forgotten as “old, unhappy, far-off things,” but all the more let our enthusiasm grow for this Divine campaign whose motive is love instead of hate, whose victories forge no chains but free from slavery. A poor Catholic, surely, a poor Christian is he who cannot be aroused by a cause like this! The Standards of the King advance. We see their gold and purple folds unrolled upon the air. Who would not drop in line, who would not fall in Step to win the world for Him? All Divine in her institution, the Church nevertheless uses every human means adapted to convey her message.

Page 205

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 173 The external glory of worship, the beauty of rite and ceremony, the brightness of lighted altars and gleaming vestments, the profusion of flowers and the fair young faces of her acolytes, the inspiration of music and song— all these are means intended to lend beauty, dignity and impressiveness to her feasts. But where can they be better employed than to express in gladness and triumphant jubilation the one great royal truth of Christ’s Kingship over all mankind? To attach still greater consequence to this truth, made visible and tangible, as it were, in the Feast of Our Lord Jesus Christ as King, the Church has made of it in reality the crowning solemnity of the entire ecclesiastical year. In the words of Pope Pius XI, she has set it for the last Sunday of October in order that so, “the mysteries of the life of Jesus Christ, commemorated during the year, will be completed and fulfilled by the sacred solemnity of Christ the King.” The Feast of All Saints, too, which direétly follows it, now takes on a new significance. It becomes supplementary to the Feast of Christ the King, bringing in glorious review before us the ranks of the Blessed in Heaven as a vast pageant lending magnificence to the Divine royalty of the God-Man. It thus can be viewed, with the new vision given us, as in reality an appanage to the Feast of Christ the King, displaying to us the splendors of His celestial Empire, where He is enthroned as King of Angels and of Saints.

Page 206

    174 THE REIGN OF CHRIST This, too, is no fanciful interpretation, but the express mind of the Church, for Pope Pius XI definitely informs us that the reason for solemnizing the Feast of Christ the King directly before that of All Saints is in order that so, “before celebrating the glory of all the saints, the glory of Him who triumphs in all the saints and elect will be preached and emphasized.” Thus the Feast of All Saints can now be said to reflect back the splendors of the Feast of Christ the King. The desire of the Church is that everything possible should be done to prepare the minds and hearts of the Faithful for the annual celebration of this Feast in a worthy and fruitful manner. Pope Pius XI, therefore, addressing the entire ecclesiastical Hierarchy of the world, laid down these regulations: “Let this, therefore, be your task to see that on stated days before the annual celebration sermons be preached to the people in every parish, informing and ingtruéting them accurately on the nature, manner, and importance of the subject, so that they may arrange and conform their lives in such a manner as to be worthy of giving faithful and zealous tribute to the Empire of the Divine King.”

Page 207

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 2. THE SOCIAL REIGN OF CHRIST THE KING The Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart, in whose renewal the Celebration of the Feast of Christ the King annually culminates, has a very special significance for our own day in its bearing on the important social question. When Our Divine Lord made known to St. Margaret Mary the devotion to the Sacred Heart as He desired it to be practised in these latter days, He gave as His reason the waning love of mankind, the coldness that had seized on the hearts of men. This it was which called forth the last supreme effort to bring about a renewal of love in the world. Seeing the affection of the Divine Heart for us, the fires of His love bursting forth from it as from a furnace and completely encompassing it; the crown of thorns about it and the cross surmounting it, in the midst of flames: recalling that eagerness for our salvation and sanctification which caused Him to sacrifice and immolate Himself for us, amidst all the ignominies and torments of Calvary—who can fail to be moved to give Him in return love for love? 175

Page 208

    176 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST Christ Our Love is crucified. It was love for us which made Him freely choose His life of labor and of suffering, His Passion and His Death. And all that love is symbolized in the flaming Heart we behold in the open breast of the Divine Master. That revelation is the last effort of His love to win our hearts for Him, to turn them towards Heaven and to God. But loving Christ we must also love our fellow man, for whatever we do to the least of our brethren, He has told us, we do unto Him, be it evil or good, and our reward or punishment will be apportioned accordingly by the Divine King. Now there precisely is the basic solution of the entire social problem. If the charity of Christ urges us, if it is the norm of our dealings with our fellow men in our social, economic, industrial, commercial and civic relations, then the social problem has been solved. All other difficulties, although they will still call for continued Study and consideration, are but minor and inconsiderable in comparison. The great obstacle in the way of a sincere codperation of all classes for the common good would then have been set aside, once for all. What else is the fundamental cause of the entire social problem which agitates the world, if not the want of love? Men either do not know Christ, or knowing Him they do not love Him as they ought. In either case the hearts of mankind are left cold and irresponsive. Men do

Page 209

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 177 not heed the laws of justice because they have already neglected the laws of charity. Love is the remedy by which the world mutt be saved. Mere human love alone does not suffice. The Love of Christ is needed, as we behold it flaming in that Sacred Heart, to re-awaken the dead bones of a godless and selfish civilization, and breathe into them the new life of grace. Mere human love will seek in vain to fill the chasms cleft open by divergent interests, economic greed and social hatred, as we behold them separating class from class in so many countries of the world today. Divine love alone can again unite class with class, consume pride and ambition, overcome selfishness and hate, and bring about a true codperation for the common good. With special confidence therefore let the world turn today in all its social difficulties to that love, both human and Divine, of the God-Man Christ, the Saviour—a love infinite in its power and most compassionate in its tenderness. But it is particularly of the human love of the Word made flesh for us that the Sacred Heart is the symbol. To this, therefore, we may confidently look for the renovation of modern society. No merely personal opinion is here expressed, but the supreme conviction of the great social Pontiff Pope Leo XIII himself. The intimate relation existing between the social problems of our day and devotion to the Sacred

Page 210

    tay 178 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST Heart was more than once clearly declared by him. The very reason for his dedication of the world to this Divine Heart, he said, was “to provide a remedy for the evils. of the day.” For the rest it will suffice to quote here the words spoken by him at a still earlier period, in 1893, to the delegates of the Apostleship of Prayer, as they are recorded by the Rev. John B. Nolin, S.J., in his “Missions and Retreats of the Sacred Heart”: “Jesus Christ had deigned to reveal to His servant Margaret Alacoque that devotion to the Sacred Heart was preordained by God to cure selfishness—the capital wound of modern society—that selfishness which is the idolatry of self or the worship of one’s own sensuality and pride; that egotism which substitutes self for God and places it above humanity, thus referring everything to self and usurping all the rights of God and the Church, of individuals and society; that selfishness which breaks all the bonds of social and Christian life by combatting at once religion and morality, authority and faith, property and family. “Now is there any means better adapted to combat it than the powerful flames of love, which, starting from the most loving Heart of Jesus, have enkindled the whole world with the happy flame of charity by breathing the spirit of a new moral and civic life into the corpse of pagan society. I am come to cast fire upon the earth. But as the preservation of things can be produced only by their general principle, and the general principle of

Page 211

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 179 Christian society is the love of the Divine Heart, it must also be its means of restoration.” Here we have in brief the entire social purpose of the devotion to the Sacred Heart. No less is proposed to us than the renewal of all things in Christ, which was to be the keynote of the Pontificate of the saintly Pope Pius X. But the liturgy itself of the Feast of Christ the King cannot fail to have its own powerful social influence as it continues to bring before the world, direétly and indirectly, the rightful claims of Christ over every form of society, and His supreme authority over all economic contracts and industrial or commercial relations. This truth was notably voiced, in anticipation, by a writer in the British Guardian, at the time when the nature of the new Feast was first made public. He then wrote: “Through the most powerful means which Rome has to reach the masses of its faithful people—the splendid living imagery of words, action and song which we call her liturgy—she is going to proclaim anew and more clearly than ever that Christ is not only King of individuals, but also King of societies, that, therefore, in the dealings of class with class or nations with nations, just as in the dealings of individuals with individuals, the only Standard of right and wrong are His precepts and His counsels; that no inferior Christian morality, charity and justice must characterize contracts between masters and workmen, state and state, and mother nation with

Page 212

    ark ie 180 4 THE REIGN OF CHRIST colonies, than that which one may demand from the dealings of a grocer with his customer. . . . The liturgy now to be prescribed is going to proclaim all over the world in the language of display, which ordinary men best understand, that any contract of which Christ would not approve is unfair and unjust and that any politics which He would spurn is unworthy of any Christian, nay, of any nation.” In the history of mankind there has been no social influence to compare with that exercised in the past by the Catholic Church. But that same power Still resides unfailingly within her. Justice, codperation, and, above all, Jove, are her lessons to the world. The truly great social workers of the world are not the sociologists, economists, and social-service agents who have divorced social science from Divine Faith, but the men and women who, with help from on high, are able to inflame anew the hearts of the masses and the classes, with that love which burned in the Heart of Christ. This alone can make all men one—one in faith, one in love, one in that Divine brotherhood which is not silvered over only with fine words and phrases, but is true and golden to the core. | ?

Page 213

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 3. REPARATION DUE THE SACRED HEART The Encyclical on Christ the King, technically known as Quas Primas, was followed by another of equally permanent importance, written by the same Pope Pius XI on “The Reparation Due the Sacred Heart,” Miserentissimus Redemptor. At the very opening of this latter document we are confronted with the striking picture that presented itself to the eyes of the Supreme Pontiff as he looked down from his high watchtower “on the human family afflicted by so many grievous ills, and on the Church, assailed without respite by attacks and plots.” Again, therefore, we have the same world-wide sweep of vision, but also the same firm hope in the unfailing assistance of Him who promised: “Behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the world.” (Matt. xxviii, 20.) It is noticeable, too, that here again Pope Pius XI at once calls attention to the Encyclical of Pope Leo XIII on the Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart, Annum Sanctum. He quotes in fact the very passage in which that great Pontiff describes the vision of Con181

Page 214

    182 THE REIGN OF CHRIST Stantine when, as the newly born Church lay helpless under the yoke of the Caesars, a cross appeared in the heavens, “‘at once the sign and the cause of the marvelous victory which was soon to follow.” So, then, in words no less strong than those of his glorious Predecessor, he too concludes that we in our own day are favored by another, no less happy and auspicious sign, which should be for us the presage of victory: “The Most Sacred Heart of Jesus, crowned by a brilliant cross set among raging flames. In this Sacred Heart we should place all our hopes, from it, too, we ask and await salvation.” In that sign and in the devotion which it suggests, he sees the very substance of our religion and our guide to a more perfect life. As a consequence he urges anew upon the Faithful all the various forms of that most salutary and alluring devotion wherein Christ draws us to Himself by the wonderful manifestation of His ignored and outraged love for us. These forms have long been familiar to us. They are mainly: the Communion of Reparation received on the First Friday of the month, the beautiful practice of the Holy Hour, the act of consecration whereby we offer ourselves and all that belongs to us to the Sacred Heart of Jesus since all we have comes to us from the infinite Love of God, and so on to the consecration of the family, of associations and parishes, of public officials, of munici 

Page 215

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 183 palities and nations, and finally of the entire human race to that Divine Heart. In the institution of the Feast of Christ the King, the Pope himself sees the completion of all these devotions: “By that act We not only brought forth clearly into the light of day the faét of the supreme dominion of Christ, over all things, over civil society and the home, as well as over individuals, but We also experienced beforehand the joy of that most happy day when the whole world will submit gladly and willingly to the sweet yoke of Christ the King. Wherefore We commanded that together with the celebration of this Feast there should be renewed annually the Act of Consecration. This We did in order to obtain more surely and in greater abundance the fruits of such a consecration, and to bind with Christian love in the communion of peace all peoples to the Heart of the King of kings and Lord of lords.” Now to that same Act of Consecration of All Mankind to the Sacred Heart Pope Pius XI believed it expedient to add another, an Act of Expiation or Reparation, also rendered to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. The former is a return of the love of the creature for the Love of the Creator; the latter is an earnest amendment for the outrages against Uncreated Love that is overlooked by men or grieved and offended by reason of our sins. The fulfilment of this duty on our part we call Reparation. It may be noted here that whereas devotion to the Sacred Heart was practised centuries before the revela 

Page 216

    184 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST tions made to St. Margaret Mary, the one new aspect of that devotion, on which these revelations particularly insisted, was the practice of Reparation. Thus the Communions of the First Fridays were to be Communions of Reparation, as even the very Feast of the Sacred Heart, set by Christ Himself for the First Friday after the Octave of Corpus Christi, was to be a feast of Reparation. Appearing to the Saint before the Blessed Sacrament, in what is known as the fourth of the “Great Apparitions,” Our Divine Lord showed to her His Sacred Heart and said: “Behold the Heart which thas so loved men, which has spared nothing even to exhausting and consuming itself, in order to testify to them its love. And the great number of them make Me no other return than ingratitude, by their coldness and their forgetfulness of Me in the Sacrament of Love. But what is still more painful to Me is that hearts consecrated to Me use Me thus. “It is because of this that I ask you to have the First Friday after the Octave of Corpus Christi kept as a special feast in honor of My Heart, by receiving Communion on that day and making it a Reparation of Honor for all the insults offered to My Heart during the time that it has been exposed on the altars. “I promise you that My Heart will pour out in abundance the powerful effects of its influence on all those who will render it this honor and who will procure that others shall render it also.”

Page 217

    Mi THE ROYAL SERVICE 185 St. Margaret Mary even urged Spiritual Communions to be frequently made by her novices that they might therein beg forgiveness for the bad Communions that are being made. It was particularly in the Blessed Sacrament that the Saint saw Jesus insulted and outraged, and so she wished that atonement might be offered especially before the altar. The great devotion of the Holy Hour, which Jesus also taught her, is most frequently pra¢tised before the Blessed Sacrament. Here, too, whatever prayers may be said, the union with Our Lord in His Agony in the Garden must always be borne in mind. Made before the Tabernacle, it is an hour of adoration and reparation offered to Our Lord in the Eucharist. Thus we see how everywhere the idea of Reparation runs through this devotion to the Sacred Heart, as Christ wished it to be “practised in these latter days.” The purpose of the Holy See is to teach us to console the Sacred Heart for all the sins and thoughtlessness of men whereby it is wounded. “My Heart hath expected reproach and misery. And I looked for one that would grieve together with Me, but there was none: and for one that would comfort Me, and I found none.” (Ps. Ixviii, 21.) Christ being in glory can now indeed suffer no longer, but He foresaw all the indignities and outrages against Him and the ingratitude of men, and tasted the bitterness of them all during His mortal life. Moreover, as the

Page 218

    186 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST Holy See teaches, the expiatory passion of Christ is in a manner continued today in the Church, His Mystic Body. “His sufferings are complete,” says St. Augustine, “but in Him as in the Head; there remain even now the sufferings of Christ to be endured in the Body.” (Ps. Ixxxvi.) Thus, therefore, when Saul breathed threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, Christ appeared to Him and referred to all this persecution as really inflicted on Himself: “I am Jesus whom thou persecutest.”” (Acts ix, 5.) That persecution of Christ is going on in the world today. Powerfully Pope Pius XI describes it when he says: “There come to our ears from every side the cries of nations, whose rulers or governments have actually risen up and have conspired together against the Lord and against His Church. We have seen both human and Divine rights overthrown in these countries, churches destroyed to their foundations, religious and consecrated virgins driven from their homes, thrown into prison, made to go hungry, treated with unspeakable savagery. We have seen troops of boys and girls, torn from the bosom of Holy Mother Church, made to deny and blaspheme Christ, and urged to commit the worst sins against purity. We have seen a whole Christian people menaced, oppressed, in constant peril of apostasy from the Faith or of a most barbarous death.” No less sad to the Supreme Pontiff is the sight of

Page 219

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 187 those poisoned by false doétrines and without the light of Faith, who are leading a sinful life far from their Father’s house, while even among the Faithful he finds disrespect for the discipline of the Church and its ancient traditions on the increase. Modesty is forgotten and the sanctity of marriage ignored. On the other hand, among the Faithful, there are those who like the Apostles are asleep, or like the disciples have fled away in the face of these evils: “And because iniquity has abounded the charity of many shall grow cold.”’ (Matt. xxiv, 12.) In contrast to all this is the ever increasing number of those who offer satisfaction to the Divine Heart. Anyone considering these facts in the spirit of love, the Papal Encyclical concludes, cannot but abhor and flee all sin as the greatest of evils. “He will also offer himself whole and entire to the will of God and will Strive to repair the injured majesty of God by constant prayer, by voluntary penances, by patient suffering of all those ills which shall befall him. In a word, he will so organize his life that in all things it will be inspired by the spirit of Reparation.” And here is the great consoling thought for us: that as Christ foresaw all the evils that were to follow and suffered for them, so He also foresaw all our acts of reparation and delighted in them. “There can be no doubt that by His prevision of our acts of reparation,” writes the Holy Father, “He was in some way comforted when

Page 220

    188 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST ‘there appeared an angel from heaven’ to console that Heart of His bowed down with sorrow and anguish.” We are therefore urged to contemplate the sufferings of Christ, weighed down by agony and reproaches, and bruised for our sins; we are to understand that the offences and crimes of men were the real reason why He was condemned to death, and that every sin, whether committed now or in the past must be said to renew in a certain way the Passion of Christ, so that men are “crucifying again to themselves the Son of God and making Him a mockery.”’ And here we are to remember too our own sins and their part in Christ’s suffering. The Encyclical on Reparation culminates in these important words: “We eStablish, therefore, and We order that annually, on the Feast of the Sacred Heart, in all the churches of the world, there take place a solemn Act of Reparation to our most loving Redeemer, in order that we may by this Act make reparation for our own sins and may repair the rights which have been violated of Christ, the King of kings and our most loving Master.” From this praétice, as the Holy See assures us, we may well look foreward to most signal blessings for individuals and for domestic and civil society, since Our Lord Himself promised St. Margaret Mary that “He would shower abundantly His graces on those who rendered this honor to His Sacred Heart.” Thus to the dark cloud there is a glory of gold that

Page 221

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 189 edges it with radiant light, the Mercy of God that will be shown to mankind for these acts of reparation, while the Mother of Reparation, “Mary Reparatrix,” as the Holy See calls her, will intercede for us with Him who is the one Mediator of God and man, Christ Jesus. She it was, we are reminded, who gave us the Redeemer, watched over Him, and at the foot of the Cross offered Him as a Victim for our sins. So now it is His wish that she should also be associated with Him, “‘as the advocate of sinners, as the dispenser and mediatress of grace.” By her, therefore, we beseech Our Lord to receive our willing homage of expiation.

Page 222

Page 223

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 4. REIGN OF CHRIST OVER THE FAMILY Much has been said of the Kingship of Christ over the individual and over society at large, a word remains to be added about that most important domain of Christ the King, the family. The unit of society, as we have often been told, is the family. Within this the individual is begotten, nurtured and formed. It is the life cell of the social organism. Nothing can well be said that could exaggerate its vital importance. All our efforts to correct society would be a vain task if we failed to consider first the regeneration of the home. To reign over the Christian family, most absolutely and completely, is the great desire of the Heart of Christ. He would preside over its gatherings and bless all its undertakings, whether temporal or spiritual. The evils of modern society are rooted in the family. Out of its indifference or irreligion, the modern godlessness springs, still further promoted by an education in the schools that know not Christ. The plague of divorce, after destroying the home, continues to menace society 191

Page 224

    192 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST in its deadly effeéts. The vice of birth control has polluted and poisoned the very wells of life. Small wonder that indifferent Catholics have themselves been infected by the false principles of the world about them. ‘‘Moreover,”’ sadly writes the Holy Father in His Encyclical on Reparation, “disrespect for the discipline of the Church is on the increase among the Faithful as also disrespeét for ancient tradition, upon which the Christian life has been built, by which domestic society is governed, by which the sanctity of marriage is protected.” The effeminacy in the education of children, whereof he complains, and the immodesty of manner and dress, particularly on the part of women, are evils not seldom found in the modern Catholic home. The disintegration of the American home, as revealed in United States Government statistics, may be judged by the average of more than one divorce in six marriages. At the present rate of increase, writes an impartial observer, the average during the next two generations may be, “perhaps one in five, or more.” There is no salvation except to return to the ideal of the home of Nazareth, on which alone the Christian family can be rightly modelled. The difficulties are great and serious in our modern civilization, but by the grace of God Catholics will be able to meet their obligations if only they earnestly and confidently seek to do His Divine Will in their regard. For as the Apostle writes:

Page 225

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 193 “God is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above that which you are able; but will make also with temptation issue, that you may be able to bear it.” (I Cor. x, 13.) Strict observance of the law of God must combine with that natural prudence which is according to the Spirit of God, and above all recourse must be had to the supernatural means which the Church offers, particularly in the frequentation of the Table of the Lord. But there is one particular means which no Catholic parents should overlook, and that is the consecration of their homes to the Sacred Heart, which the Church so greatly urges upon them. The beautiful formula of that Act of Consecration, especially indulgenced by her, is given in the following section. In the first place the Consecration takes place before an image of the Sacred Heart. That likeness of Chris, with the thorn-crowned, cross-surmounted Heart, flaming in His Divine breast, should occupy a striking and prominent position in the home, where it can serve as a continual reminder of true family union, a sublime inspiration for good, and a constant incentive to love. Before that same image also the annual renewals of the Act of Consecration are solemnly to be made. The very presence of that image of the Sacred Heart thus honored in the home, carries with it most special blessings definitely promised in the revelations granted to St. Margaret Mary.

Page 226

    194 THE REIGN OF CHRIST “He assured me,” the Saint wrote, “that He is pleased especially to be honored under the appearance of His corporal Heart, and He desired that the picture of this should be publicly exposed for veneration, in order, as He added, to touch by this sight the unfeeling hearts of men. He promised me that He would pour forth in riche&t abundance all the gifts of grace wherewith His Heart is filled, upon the hearts of those who would show Him this honor, and that this picture should draw down blessings of every kind in all places where it is exposed for veneration.” The Act of Consecration itself is most perfedtly adapted to eStablish the reign of Christ over the family, and to render permanent within it that peace of Christ which He has promised to the homes where His Sacred Heart is honored. In it Christ is asked to reign over the minds and the hearts of all within that household, that they may live with His life and set an example of the virtues which He practised. On Him they call to dispel their cares, to sanctify their joys, to alleviate their sufferings. Through Him they look for perfeét resignation in life and death, confidently hoping thereafter to be reunited once more for an eternity of joy in Heaven. Quite fittingly, too, by “the Immaculate Heart of Mary and the glorious Patriarch St. Joseph,” this consecration is presented to the Sacred Heart of Christ. The reminders of them also should ever be about us, and what truly Catholic home does not display, with the image of

Page 227

    THE ROYAL SERVICE 195 the Sacred Heart, the representations likewise of Mary and Joseph? Such pictures and Statues, devotional in their nature and artistic in their beauty, have a powerful effect in constantly familiarizing the members of the family with those most powerful and glorious of friends, who should at all times be near and dear to them. Surely, also, there will be place for the Guardian Angel and perhaps the patron saints most specially invoked. How often, for instance, does not a glance at a likeness of the Little Flower strike the soul like a chord of heavenly music, banishing all that is low and base, leaving in the mind an exquisite sense of purity, and thrilling the heart with that childlike confidence and love of God which it is her mission to spread on earth to the end of time. A particularly happy custom is the consecration of parishes to the Sacred Heart, renewed each year at the most opportune time when the greatest numbers of the Faithful can be gathered. This concluded, the parishioners are induced to consecrate their own families to the Sacred Heart on their return to their homes. Thus not one single Catholic home should be left where Christ has not been conStituted King by this solemn dedication to His Divine Heart. In this work, teachers, too, it is suggested, can be helpful by inducing their pupils in our Catholic schools to

Page 228

    196 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST write out the Aét of Consecration of the Family and persuade their parents to dedicate their homes to the Sacred Heart. Thus even little children can be made missionaries to spread the Kingdom of Christ on earth. Similar use of God’s little ones to bring about the very conversion of their parents from pagan superstitions is sufficiently common in mission countries. Besides the family consecration there are of course the individual aéts which each one can make. Here, for instance, is a brief indulgenced formula, to be recited before an image of the Sacred Heart: “My loving Jesus, out of the grateful love I bear Thee, and to make reparation for my unfaithfulness to grace, I (N.N.) give Thee my heart, and I consecrate myself wholly to Thee; and with Thy help I purpose never to sin again.” But true and deep devotion to the Sacred Heart cannot possibly remain a mere personal affection for Our Divine Lord, nor even can it be confined within the family circle. It must of necessity become social, national, world-embracing in its zeal—at least so far as its prayers, intentions and aspirations are concerned. Most of us, besides, will be able to do much prattical, far-reaching good in the aid of worthy causes that promote the Reign of Christ upon the earth. “The harvest indeed is great, but the laborers are few. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest that He send

Page 229

    a THE ROYAL SERVICE 197 forth laborers into the harvest.” Who at all events cannot do that much? “I have a baptism wherewith I am to be baptized: and how I am Straitened until it be accomplished.” Such was the longing of Our Lord Himself for souls, even unto the baptism of His own Blood to be consummated on the Cross. Unless something of this zeal has taken possession of our hearts we have understood little as yet of that devotion to the Sacred Heart of Our Saviour who came to cast fire upon the earth and wishes to see it kindled and spread out into one earth-enveloping flame of love. The spiritual campaign thus unfolded before us in these pages is wide as the world and vast as mankind. The desire of the Holy See in eStablishing the Feast of Our Lord Jesus Christ as King and in consecrating td His Sacred Heart the entire human race, was no less, as we have seen, than to subject to the sweet Reign of Christ every individual, every family, every society, every nation of the world until the whole earth might resound with one hymn of praise and glory to the Sacred Heart. In this great mission, in this modern crusade, in this vast campaign, before which all others dwindle into insignificance, where shall be our place; what shall we do to promote, most widely and effectively, the Kingdom of Christ upon earth? That is the question for each one to ponder and answer, with the aid of the spirit of God. It is a question

Page 230

Page 231

    TO THE SACRED HEART

Page 232

    The text on this page is estimated to be only 37.50% accurate
    Ms Soe

Page 233

    TO THE SACRED HEART ACT OF CONSECRATION OF THE HUMAN RACE TO THE SACRED HEART OF JESUS Ordained by Pope Pius XI to be publicly renewed each year on the last Sunday of October, the Feast of Christ the King. OST SWEET JESUS, Redeemer of the human M race, look down upon us humbly prostrate before Thy altar. We are Thine, and Thine we wish to be; but, to be more surely united with Thee, behold each one of us freely consecrates himself today to Thy Most Sacred Heart. Many indeed have never known Thee; many too, despising Thy precepts, have rejected Thee. Have mercy on them all, most merciful Jesus, and draw them to Thy Sacred Heart. Be Thou King, O Lord, not only of the faithful who have never forsaken Thee, but also of the prodigal children who have abandoned Thee; grant that they may quickly return to their Father’s house lest they die of wretchedness and hunger. Be Thou King of those who are deceived by erroneous opinions, or whom discord keeps aloof, and call them back to the harbor of truth and unity of faith, so that 201

Page 234

    darkness of idolatry or of Islamism, and re ot draw them all into the light and kingdom of God. thine eyes of mercy towards the children of that race once Thy chosen people. Of old they called down up _ themselves the Blood of the Saviour; may It now descen upon them a laver of redemption and of life. Grant, | Lord, to Thy Church assurance of freedom and imm nity from harm; give peace and order to all nation and make the earth resound from pole to pole with one cry: Praise to the Divine Heart that wrought our salvation; to It be glory and honor forever. Amen.

Page 235

    TO THE SACRED HEART ACT OF REPARATION TO THE SACRED HEART OF JESUS Ordained by Pope Pius XI to be publicly made each year, in all the churches of the world, on the Feast of the Sacred Heart of Jesus. for men is repaid with blackest ingratitude, so forgetful, so heedless, so scornful of Thy great goodness: behold us prostrate before Thy altar, seeking with special tribute of honor to atone for the sinful indifference of men and for the outrages heaped from every side upon Thy most Loving Heart. And yet, mindful that we also more than once have been guilty of like unworthy deeds, we are Stirred to deepest sorrow and therefore we beseech Thy mercy, first of all, upon ourselves. We are eager and resolved to make amends not only for our own transgressions but also for the sins of those who, straying far from the path of salvation, either will not follow Thee as shepherd and leader, or trampling under foot their baptismal vows have shaken off the easy yoke of Thy holy law. 203 Sis SAVIOUR JESUS, whose boundless love

Page 236

    204 : THE REIGN OF CHRIST We seek, O Lord, to atone for this wickedness in all its hideous forms. In particular we purpose to expiate immodesty and shamelessness in behavior and dress, the numberless snares that are laid for the corruption of innocent minds, the breaking of holy days, the horrible blasphemies uttered against Thee and Thy saints, the revilings flung at Thy Vicar on earth and at Thy priesthood, the slights which are put upon Thee in the very Sacrament of Thy divine love, the frightful sacrileges by which It is profaned, and lastly the wrongs that are publicly committed by nations in defying the authority and in violating the rights of the Church which Thou didst establish. Would that with our blood we might wash away such awful crimes! The more earnestly, O Lord, as reparation to Thy divine honor, we offer Thee the self-same satisfaction which once Thou didst offer on the Cross to Thy Father, and which daily is renewed upon the altar, beseeching Thee to receive it together with the expiations of Thy Virgin Mother, of all Thy Saints, and of all devout Christians. From the bottom of our hearts we promise, with the help of Thy grace to compensate as far as in us lies for our evil doing, for the sins of others and for our coldness and theirs toward Thee and Thy most generous love. This we propose to do by unyielding firmness of faith, by pureness of life, by perfect observance of the Gospel law, above all, the precept of charity. We promise to hinder as best we can any further offenses '

Page 237

    TO THE SACRED HEART 205 against Thee. We will bring, moreover, as many as possible into Thy holy fellowship. Receive, we beseech Thee, Jesus most kind, through the intercession of Blessed Mary ever Virgin, Mother of Reparation, our willing homage of expiation. Grant us the gift of perseverance and through it keep us ever faithful to our duty and to Thy service, so that we all may come at last to that blessed homeland where Thou together with the Father and the Holy Spirit livest and reignest God, for ever and ever. Amen.

Page 238

Page 239

    TO THE SACRED HEART ACT OF CONSECRATION OF THE FAMILY TO THE SACRED HEART OF JESUS Formula prescribed March 1, 1918. A Plenary Indulgence can be gained on the day when this Consecration is first made and on each day of its renewal from year to year. to Saint Margaret Mary the desire of reigning in Christian families, we today wish to proclaim Thy most complete regal dominion over our own. We would live in future with Thy life, we would cause to flourish in our midst those virtues to which Thou hast promised peace here below, we would banish far from us the spirit of the world which Thou hast cursed; and Thou shalt reign over our minds in the simplicity of our faith, and over our hearts by the whole-hearted love with which they shall burn for Thee, the flame of which we shall keep alive by the frequent reception of Thy Divine Eucharist. Deign, O Divine Heart, to preside over our assemblings, to bless our enterprises, both spiritual and tem207 Ses HEART OF JESUS, who didst manifest

Page 240

    208 ‘ THE REIGN OF CHRIST poral, to dispel our cares, to sanctify our joys, to alleviate our sufferings. If ever one or other of us should have the misfortune to afflict Thee, remind him, O Heart of Jesus, that Thou art good and merciful to the penitent sinner. And when the hour of separation Strikes, when death shall come to cast mourning into our midst, we will all, both those who go and those who stay, be submissive to Thy eternal decrees. We will console ourselves with the thought that a day will come when the entire family, reunited in Heaven, can sing for ever Thy glories and Thy mercies. May the Immaculate Heart of Mary and the glorious Patriarch, St. Joseph, present this consecration to Thee, and keep it in our minds all the days of our life! All glory to the Heart of Jesus, our King and our Father! Amen. hae i bud, . ee

Page 241

    TO THE SACRED HEART ACT OF PERSONAL LOYALTY TO OUR KING | Prayer to Christ the King A Plenary Indulgence can be gained daily by the devout recitation of this prayer under the usual conditions—namely Confession, Communion, and prayers for the Holy Father’s intentions. (Sacred Penitentiary, February 21, 1923.) The translation is that approved by his Eminence Cardinal Hayes and issued by the Apostleship of Prayer. CHRIST JESUS, I acknowledge You as UniC) versal King. All that has been made, was created for You. Exercise over me all the rights that You have. I renew my baptismal promises, renouncing Satan, his pomps and his works, and I promise to live as a good Christian. Especially do I pledge myself by all the means in my power to bring about the triumph of the rights of God and of Your Church. Divine Heart of Jesus, I offer You my poor actions to obtain that all hearts may recognize Your consecrated Kingship and that thus the Kingdom of Your peace may be established in the whole world. Amen. 209

Page 242

    210 ‘ THE REIGN OF CHRIST Ejaculation to Christ the King An Indulgence of one hundred days each time. (Sacred Penitentiary, March 9, 1923.) ACRED HEART OF JESUS, our King, I love thee with Thy love for me and for the whole world!

Page 243

    ENCYCLICAL OF POPE PIUS XI ON THE FEAST OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, KING Quas Primas

Page 244

Page 245

    ENCYCLICAL OF POPE PIUS XI ON THE FEAST OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, KING * TO OUR VENERABLE BROTHERS, PATRIARCHS, PRIMATES, ARCHBISHOPS, AND BISHOPS AND ALL ORDINARIES IN PEACE AND COMMUNION WITH THE APOSTOLIC SEE PIUS XI GREETINGS AND THE APOSTOLIC BLESSING N the First Encyclical that We addressed to all the | Bishops of the Catholic world on the occasion of our elevation to the Supreme Pontificate, in which We outlined the principal causes of the calamities with which We saw mankind to be oppressed and harassed, We remember having Stated quite definitely that evil has spread throughout the world because the greater part of mankind banished Jesus Christ and His holy law from their lives, their families, and from public affairs, and that there never would arise a sure hope of lasting peace between the peoples of the world as long as individuals * Translated by Msgr. James H. Ryan, D.D., Ph.D., copyrighted by the N. C. W. C. News Service. 213

Page 246

    214 THE REIGN OF CHRIST and nations continued to deny or refused to acknowledge the rule of Christ, Our Saviour. As we warned at that time, it is necessary for all men to seek “the peace of Christ in the Kingdom of Christ.” We announced, too, that We would do everything possible to attain this, the purpose of our pontificate. We used the phrase “the Kingdom of Christ” because it seemed to Us that the eStablishment of peace could not be achieved except by a reStoration of the Kingdom of Our Lord. Meanwhile the beginning of a movement of the peoples of the earth towards Christ and His Church, from whom alone salvation can come, gave Us renewed hopes of better times. It was a movement in which We perceived that many who had hitherto despised the Kingdom of Christ and who had pra¢tically exiled themselves from their Father’s house were prepared and were even anxious to tread again the paths of obedience. LESSONS OF HOLY YEAR And should not all that has happened during this Holy Year, a year worthy of perpetual remembrance, increase the honor and glory of the Divine Founder of the Church, who is at the same time Our Supreme King and Lord? The Vatican Missionary Exposition has influenced most deeply the hearts and minds of men. It has made known the lasting work of the Church whose purpose it is to extend the Kingdom of her Spouse into

Page 247

    ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 215 every continent, even to the most remote islands of the seas. It has also shown the great number of countries won to Catholicism by the sweat and blood of courageous and self-sacrificing missionaries. In spite of this noble work many vast regions are yet to be added to the benign and saving rule of Our King. Those great multitudes who, during the Year of Jubilee, came from every part of the globe to the Holy City, led there by their bishops and priests, their hearts purified by the grace of the sacraments, what more noble thing could they do than proclaim themselves, both before the Tombs of the Apostles and before Us, faithful subjects of Christ, now and forever? This Kingdom of Christ appeared almo&t suffused with a new light when We raised to the honor of the altar six confessors and virgins whose heroic virtues had been amply demonStrated to all mankind. What joy, what comfort We experienced when, amidst the splendors of the Vatican Basilica, having promulgated the solemn decrees of their canonization, an immense multitude of people spontaneously raising their voices in a hymn of thanksgiving cried out: “Thou, O Christ, art the King of Glory.” Thus, while men and nations, alienated from God because of mutual hatred and internal discord, condemn themselves to ruin and to death, the Church of God continues to feed us with the food of the spiritual life. She Still creates and fashions generations of saints for Jesus Christ. He, on His side, does not cease to bring to

Page 248

    S10). THE REIGN OF CHRIST the joys of the Kingdom of Heaven those who had shown i themselves faithful and obedient subjects in His earthly _ Kingdom. Added to all this was the celebration of the Sixteenth Centenary of the Council of Nicea, which also occurred during this Jubilee Year. We desired that this Centenary should be worthily commemorated, and We Ourselves commemorated it in the Vatican Basilica, and this We did all the more willingly because the Holy Synod of Nicea had defined the dogma of the consubstantiality of the Son and the Father and had, at the same time, inserted in the Creed the formula, “of whose reign there will be no end.” In these words it proclaimed the royal dignity of Christ. This Holy Year, therefore, having manifested in more ways than one the Kingdom of Christ it seemed well to Us to do all that our Apostolic Office implies by closing it with the institution of a special feast for the liturgy in honor of Jesus Christ, the King. We did this, too, after many Cardinals, Bishops, and the faithful, both singly and collectively, had asked Us to do so. All these events gave Us so much joy that We are constrained to speak. You, Venerable Brothers, We ask to adapt that which we write about the cult of Jesus Christ, our King, to the intelligence of your people and to explain its full meaning to them so that much spiritual fruit may be derived from the annual celebration of this great Feast.

Page 249

    ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 217 CHRIST’S TITLES OF ROYALTY Since ancient times it has been customary to bestow upon Christ the title of King because of His lordship over all created things. As King, He reigns in the minds of men, not only because of the keenness of His mind or the vastness of His knowledge, but also because He is the Truth, and it is therefore necessary that all men seek and receive the truth from Him in full obedience. Likewise, He reigns in the will of men, either for the reason that in Him reside perfect command over and a complete submission of the human will to the behests of the Divine Will, or because by His holy inspiration He influences our free will in such an efficacious way that we are led to desire only the noblest things. Finally, He is recognized as the King of Our Hearts because of that love of His which surpasses all understanding (Eph. iii, 19) and also of the supreme attraction for us of His divine meekness and kindliness. No man, in fact, ever was so much loved as Jesus Christ, or ever will be. And in order to enter most intimately into the merits of the question We assert that it is necessary to vindicate for the Christ-man both the name and power of a King in the full meaning of that term. As a matter of fact, it is only of Him as man that it can be said that He has received “power, honor, and kingdom” from the Father (Dan. vii, 13-14). The reason for this is that since He is the Word of God, of the self-same substance as the Father, He must have in common with the Father all that pertains to the Divine

Page 250

    7 be eeamek THE REIGN OF CHRIST nature, and by consequence He possesses full and absolute sway over all created things. TESTIMONY OF HOLY SCRIPTURE Do we not often read in the Holy Scriptures that Christ is King? He is called the Prince who shall come out of Jacob (Num. xxiv, 19), who has been named by his father King of Sion, the Holy Mountain, who shall receive the Gentiles for his inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for his possession (Ps. ii, 8). In the Psalm of the Beloved in which under the image of a rich and powerful king is prefigured the future King of Israel, we read the words, “Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever: the sceptre of thy Kingdom is a sceptre of uprightness.” (Ps. xliv, 7.) Besides many other passages we may cite one which clearly portrays the character of Christ when it predicts that His kingdom will be from sea to sea and will be marked by the reign of justice and of peace. “In his days shall justice spring up and abundance of peace . . . he shall rule from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth” (Ps. Ixxi, 7-8). To the above testimonies must be added the Startling predidtion of the prophets, and in a special manner that most notable prophecy of Isaias: “For a Child is born to us, and a son is given to us, and the government is upon his shoulder; and his name shall be called, Wonderful, Counsellor, God the Mighty, the Father of the world to come, the Prince of Peace. His empire shall be multiplied, and there

Page 251

    ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 219 shall be no end of peace: he shall sit upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom; to establish it and. Strengthen it with judgment and with justice, from henceforth and for ever: the zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this” (ix, 6-7). The other prophets are in complete agreement with Isaias, and especially Jeremias when he foretold that a “Just Seed” would be born of the house of David, and that this Son of David “a King, shall reign and shall be wise; and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth” (xxiii, 5). Daniel, too, foretells the founding of a Kingdom by the Lord of Heaven who “will set up a kingdom that shall never be destroyed . . . it shall Stand forever” (ii, 44). “I beheld therefore,” continued the Prophet, “‘in the vision of the night, and lo, one like the son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and he came even to the Ancient of days: and they presented him before him. And he gave him power, and glory, and a kingdom: and all peoples, tribes and tongues shall serve him: his power is an everlasting power that shall not be taken away: and his kingdom that shall not be destroyed” (Dan. vii, 13-14). PREDICTIONS FULFILLED The writers of our Holy Gospels likewise recognize that in Christ was fulfilled the prediction of Zacharias concerning the “Meek King” when Jesus Christ, the Just One and the Saviour, rode upon an ass and upon a

Page 252

    220 : THE REIGN OF CHRIST colt, the foal of an ass (Zach. ix, 9) into Jerusalem amidst the acclamations of the multitude. This doétrine of Christ the King which We have taken from the very words of the Old Testament is duplicated in the New wherein it is confirmed in a most remarkable manner. For in the New Testament is contained the announcement of the Archangel informing the Virgin Mary that she shall conceive and bear a Son on whom God will bestow the throne of David, his progenitor, and that the new-born child will reign in the House of Jacob for all eternity, that His Kingdom shall be without end (Luke 1, 32-33). Christ Himself bears teStimony in His own words to the existence of His Kingdom. Thus, alike in His last discourse to the multitude when He spoke of the rewards and punishment which shall be meted out for all eternity to the just and the unjust; when He replied to the Roman Consul who publicly asked Him if He were a King; or when, after His resurrection He bestowed upon the Apostles the office of teaching and baptizing, Christ took every opportunity to call Himself a King (Matt. xxv, 31-40), and to publicly affirm His Kingship (John xviii, 37), to which had been confided all power both in heaven and on earth (Matt. xxviii, 18). Could He possibly have meant anything else by these words than that His regal power was absolute and that His Kingdom extended over all the earth? It should not surprise us, therefore, if He whom John called the “Prince of the kings of the earth” (Apoc. i, 5) when He appeared to the Apostles, as nar 

Page 253

    ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 221, rated in the vision of the Apocalypse, wore “on his garment and on his thigh written: King of Kings, and Lord of Lords” (xix, 16). Since the Eternal Father has made Christ His heir in all things (Hebr. i, 2), it is necessary that He should rule until the end of time, that is, until all His enemies are brought back captives to the very footstool of the throne of God (I Cor. xv, 25). As a result of this doctrine found in the Holy Scriptures, the Church, the Kingdom of Christ on this earth, and which by divine command is spread amongst all men and all nations, proclaimed Him her Founder in the annual cycle of the liturgy, as Sovereign Lord and King of Kings. In affectionate veneration for Christ she multiplies the titles of honor which she bestows upon Him. These same titles are expressed in manifold beautiful ways, as for example in the ancient Antiphonaries and Sacramentaries, in the Holy Office, and in the daily Sacrifice of the Immaculate Host in Mass. It is by this constant praise of Christ the King that is shown, too, the wonderful harmony which exists between our own Rite and that of the Eastern Churches, so much so that the axiom, legem credendi lex Statuit supplicand (“The law of prayer determines the law of belief’) takes on a deeper truth. BASIS SHOWN FOR ROYAL DIGNITY St. Cyril of Alexandria, writing on this subject, points out the basis for the royal dignity and power of Christ

Page 254

    222 THE REIGN OF CHRIST when he says, “He obtained the dominion over every creature not by force nor because of mere external reasons, but because of His very essence and nature” (Luk., 10). What he affirms is that the Royalty of Christ is founded solely on that admirable union in Him of two natures which we call the Hypostatic Union. From which truth it follows that Jesus Christ must not only be adored by angels and men as God, but that they must be subject to and obey Him as well, because He is Man: it is by reason of the fact of the Hypostatic Union, and that alone, that Christ has power over all creatures. What thought could be more beautiful and more inspiring than that Christ rules over us, not only by right of birth but also by right of conquest, brought about by His redemption of mankind? God desired forgetful man to recall at what a great price we were bought by Our Saviour. “Knowing that you were not redeemed with corruptible things as gold or silver, from your vain conversation of the tradition of your fathers: But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb unspotted and undefiled” (I Peter 1, 18-19). We, therefore, no longer belong to ourselves alone, for Christ has bought us with a “great price” (I Cor. vi, 20). Our bodies too “are the members of Christ” (I Cor. vi, 15). We now wish to outline the nature and importance of this supremacy of Christ. It consists of a threefold power, of which if even one element were missing, it would no longer contain the idea of a true and real supremacy.

Page 255

    ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 223 The text of the Sacred Scriptures that treat of the universal empire of Our Redeemer superabundantly prove what We have said. It is a dogma of faith that men have been given Jesus Christ as a Redeemer in whom they must believe and a lawmaker whom they must obey. The Holy Gospels not only tell us that Christ promulgated laws, but they also present Him in the very act of making them. Under different circumstances and in different words the Divine Master affirms that whosoever will keep His commandments gives proof thereby of loving Him and will remain in His love (John xiv, 15; xv, 10). Christ Himself affirmed in the presence of the Jews, who had accused Him of having violated the Sabbath by curing the paralytic, that the Father had given Him judicial power. “For neither doth the Father judge any man, but hath given all judgment to the Son” (John v, 22). By this we must understand that He had the right also of rewarding and punishing men even during their lives since this inheres in the power of judging. Executive power must equally be attributed to Christ, since it is necessary for all to obey His commands, and for none to escape them without meeting the punishments He eStablished. THIS KINGDOM CHIEFLY SPIRITUAL That this Kingdom is principally a spiritual one and to it belong spiritual things, the passages of the Holy Bible referred to above show, and Jesus Christ Himself

Page 256

    224 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST confirms by His deeds. On various occasions when the Jews and the Apostles themselves believed falsely that the Messiah would free the people and eStablish the Kingdom of Israel, He sought to dispel this vain hope from their minds. When He was about to be proclaimed King by the multitude that admiringly crowded about Him, He declined the title and honor, and retiring hid Himself in the desert. Finally, He announced before the Roman Consul that His Kingdom “was not of this earth.” In the Gospels this Kingdom is presented in the following manner: Men must prepare themselves to enter therein by means of penance and they cannot enter except through faith and through the Sacrament of Baptism, which though an external rite signifies and produces interior grace. This Kingdom is opposed only to the Kingdom of Satan and the powers of darkness. It requires from its subjects not only that their souls be detached from riches and worldly things; that they rule their lives, and that they hunger and thirst after justice, but also that they renounce themselves and take up their cross. Who does not see royal dignity in the spiritual character of Christ as Redeemer founding the Church by His blood, and of Christ as Priest offering Himself forever as a sacrifice of propitiation for the sins of men? Moreover, since Christ has received from the Father an absolute right over all created things, so that they all are subject to His will, they would err grievously who would take from the Christ-Man power over all temporal

Page 257

    ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 225 things. Yet, because on earth He abstained completely from exercising that power and despised possessions and the care of worldly things, so He has permitted and permits rightful possession of them, but He commands that the possessors must serve Him. The words “He does not take from us mortal things Who bestows upon us heavenly Kingdoms” (Hymn, Epiphany) are well adapted to show this. The dominion of the Redeemer embraces, therefore, all men, as was said in the words of Our Predecessor of lasting memory, Leo XIII, which We here make Our own: “The Empire of Christ extends not only over Catholic peoples and over those who, reborn in the fount of Baptism, belong by right to the Church, even though error has driven them far and dissension has separated them from the bond of love; it embraces even those who do not enjoy the Christian Faith, so that all mankind is under the power of Jesus Christ” (Encycl. Annum Sacrum). Nor is any distinction made between individuals, the home, or civil society, since men are no less under the power of Christ when united in society than as single individuals. He alone is the source of individual and public welfare. “‘Neither is there salvation in any other. For there is no other name under heaven given to men, whereby we must be saved” (Acts iv, 12). He alone is the Author of prosperity and true happiness both in individual citizens and in States. “The duties of the blessed city and duties of man are no different; for the city is

Page 258

    226 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST no other than a concourse of men” (Aug. ad Maced. 18, iii). If the heads of nations wish the safety of their governments and the growth and progress of their country, they must not refuse to give, together with their people, public teStimony of reverence and obedience to the empire of Christ. What We said at the beginning of Our Pontificate about the breakdown of the principle of authority and of respect for government may fittingly be said again: “They have driven Jesus Christ,” We then lamented, “out of laws and public affairs.” Authority suddenly appears to be something derived not from God but from men, and consequently its foundations totter. Forgotten the First Cause, there is no reason why one should command and another obey. From this error indeed come those widespread disturbances in society when it rests no longer upon its natural foundations (Udi Arcano). PROMISE OF HARMONY AND PEACE If men, instead, both privately and publicly, will recognize the sovereign power of Christ, the signal benefits of a just freedom, of calm order and of harmony and peace will pervade the whole human race. Just as the royal rights of Our Lord render the human authority of princes and heads of States sacred to a certain degree, so too they ennoble the duties imposed by obedience on the citizen. Impressing upon wives and servants the necessity of beholding Christ in their husbands and masters, St. Paul

Page 259

    _ oe ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 227 clearly warns them that they should not obey them as men but because they recognize them as the heirs of Christ. Otherwise it would not be fitting for men redeemed by Christ to serve other men. “You are bought with a price; be not the bond-slaves of men” (I Cor. vii, 23). If princes and legitimate rulers will be convinced that they rule not so much in their own right as through a mandate from the Divine King, it is easy to see what holy and wise use they will make of their power, and with what zeal for the common good and the dignity of their subjects they will be inflamed both in the making and the enforcing of laws. When this happens every reason for sedition is removed and order and tranquillity flourish and grow strong. When citizens see that their rulers and the heads of their States are men like themselves, or are for some reason unworthy or culpable, they will continue even then to obey their commands because they will recognize in them the image of the authority of Christ, the God-Man. As for the effect of all this upon concord and peace, manifestly the vaster this Kingdom is and the more widely it embraces mankind, so much the more will men become conscious of the bond of brotherhood that unites them. Just as this consciousness of their brotherhood banishes confliéts, so too it weakens bitternesses and turns them into love. If the Kingdom of Christ, which rightly embraces all men, should in faét embrace them, could we then despair of that peace which the King of Peace

Page 260

    228 : THE REIGN. OF CHRIST brought to earth, that King, We say, who came “to reconcile all things, who did not come to be served but to serve others” and who, though the Lord of all, made Himself an example of humility and eStablished humility and charity as His chief law? “My yoke,” He said, “is sweet and my burden light” (Matt. xi, 30). Oh, what happiness might we enjoy if individual families and States would only allow themselves to be ruled by Christ! “Then indeed,” to use the words of Our Predecessor, Leo XIII, addressed twenty-five years ago to all the Bishops of the Catholic world, “would many wounds be cured, and every right would regain its ancient force and the blessings of peace would return, and swords and weapons would fall to the ground, when all would willingly accept the Empire of Christ and obey Him and when every tongue would proclaim that ‘Our Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory of the Father.’” (Annum. Sacrum, May 25, 1899.) In order that these wished-for results may be more abundant and may last longer in human society, it is necessary for the royal dignity of Our Lord to be recognized and spread abroad as widely as possible. To this end it seems to Us that nothing else can help as much as to institute a particular feast day that will belong to Christ Our King. The annual celebration of the sacred mysteries is more effective in informing people in the faith and in bringing the inward joys of life to them than the solemn pronouncements of the teaching Church.

Page 261

    ke ee Aree an ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 229 Documents are often read only by a few learned men; feasts move and teach all the faithful. The former speak only once; the latter every year and forever. The former bring a saving touch only to the mind; the latter influence not only the mind but the heart and man’s whole nature. Being composed of body and soul, man needs to be aroused by external solemnities so that, through the variety and beauty of the sacred liturgy, he may receive the Divine teachings in his soul and, then changing them into substance and blood, use them to advance in the spiritual life. FEASTS INTRODUCED TO MEET SPECIAL NEEDS From history, it is learned that the feasts of the Church during the passing of the centuries were introduced one after the other, according as the need of welfare of Christian peoples seemed to require it. As, for example, when it was necessary that people should be strengthened before a common danger or defended from the poisonous errors of heretics or strongly encouraged to celebrate with greater piety some mystery of Faith or a blessing of divine grace. Thus, in the first centuries of the Christian Era, when the Faithful were bitterly persecuted, sacred rites were decreed to commemorate the martyrs until, as St. Augustine writes, “the solemn functions of the feast days of the martyrs were themselves exhortations to martyrdom” (Ser. 47, in Sanc#.). The

Page 262

    230 : THE REIGN OF CHRIST liturgical honors that later were bestowed on Confessors, Virgins, and Widows served marvelously to arouse in the Faithful that love of virtue which is also necessary in the days when the Church is at peace. Especially were feast days created to honor the Blessed Virgin so that the Christian people might not only venerate with greater piety the Mother of God, the proteétress of the Christ Child, but also be impelled towards a stronger love for her whom Our Redeemer in his last testament left to us as our Heavenly Mother. Amongst the many benefits gained from this public veneration of the Mother of God and of the Saints, not the least is that through this cult the Church, in all ages, has succeeded in rooting out the plague of heresy and error. In this Divine order we must admire the designs of Providence which draws good out of evil. In spite of a weakening of both the faith and the piety of people from time to time, and the spread of error, Catholic truth, supported by Divine Providence shone forth in spite of all opposition in new splendor and men being awakened from their spiritual lethargy aim to achieve greater and holier objectives. As a matter of fact, the feasts that occur during the course of the liturgical year which have been instituted in our own times, had the self-same origin and produced similar effects. Thus when respect for and the worship of the MoSt Blessed Sacrament grew weak, the Feast of Corpus Christi was instituted, and was ordered to be celebrated in such a manner that the solemn proces 

Page 263

    re or ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 231 sions and prayers recited during the octave would recall people to their duty of publicly venerating Our Lord. When because of the forbidding rigorisms of Jansenism the souls of men had grown weak and they had lost heart the feast of the Sacred Heart of Jesus was instituted so that their frigidity might be thawed out and they reclaimed by the love of God and the promise of everlasting Strength. Now when We, therefore, command that Christ Our King be venerated by Catholics throughout the world, We are providing for the special needs of Our own day a very effective remedy against the pests which pervade human society. The plague of our age is what is called laicism, with all its attendant errors and impious motives. You know, Venerable Brothers, that such impiety does not grow up over-night. For a long time it has been eating its way into the very vitals of society. As a matter of faét, the rule of Christ over mankind has been denied, the Church has been refused the right which comes from the very law of Jesus Christ to teach all peoples, to make her own laws for the spiritual government of her subjects in order to bring them to eternal happiness. Little by little the Christian religion has been made the equal of other and false religions and has been lowered to their level. The Catholic religion was made subject to the civil power and was practically abandoned to the control of rulers and magistrates. This error even went Still further; an attempt was made to substitute a certain

Page 264

    2222. THE REIGN OF CHRIST vague natural religion for the truth of the religion of Christ. There were not wanting governments which imagined they could do without God and cover up their lack of religion by irreligion and disrespect for God Himself. We have already written in sorrow in Our Encyclical Ubi Arcano of the evil effeéts of this abandonment of Christ on the part both of individuals and of nations. Today as well We grieve over these things, over the seeds of discord apparently sown everywhere, the rekindling of hatreds and rivalries between peoples which prevent the re-establishment of peace; We grieve over the unrestrained passions, so often hidden under the mask of the public good and love of country; the civil discords which arise from this source together with that blind unmeasured egotism that is so widely diffused which, thinking only of one’s own private good and welfare, measures all things by this false rule; over domestic peace grievously disturbed because of forgetfulness and the wilful disregard of family duties; over the natural unity and Stability of the family broken, and last of all, over society itself shaken to its foundations and plunging headlong to ruin. LEADING SOCIETY BACK TO CHRIST In spite of all this We are sustained by the holy hope that the Feast of Christ Our King which will be celebrated hereafter every year will at last lead back society to Our Blessed Saviour, an end which all men devoutly

Page 265

    , a SE CUS eae ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 233 look forward to. To hasten this return to Chris by means of good works and organized social action is a duty incumbent on every Catholic, of many of whom it can be said truthfully, that neither positions nor authority in civic life have been accorded as would be fitting to those who carry before them the torch of Truth. This condition perhaps is due to the apathy or the timidity of the good who abstain from strife and are apt to resist only too weakly. From our weakness the enemies of the Church are emboldened to greater and more fearless a¢ts of audacity. But when the Faithful clearly understand that they must fight with courage, always under the banner of Christ Our King, they will then Study with the zeal of Apostles how best to lead rebellious and ignorant people back to God. At the same time they will themselves acquire strength to keep inviolate God’s holy laws. Certainly it appears to Us that an annual celebration of the Feast of Christ Our King will greatly assist all nations towards a condemnation of, and a reparation for, those public apostasies which Jaicism with so much harm to society has begotten. In fact the more the dear name of Our Redeemer is passed over in shameful silence, be it at international meetings, be it in parliaments, so much the more necessary is it to acclaim Him as King and announce everywhere the rights of His royal dignity and power. All indeed can see that since the end of the last century, the way was being prepared for the long desired

Page 266

    234 ‘ THE REIGN OF CHRIST institution of this new feast day. No one can be ignorant of how this cult was spread and defended in books written in all the languages of the civilized world. The supremacy of the Kingdom of Christ was also recognized in the pious practice of all those who dedicated, even consecrated, their families to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. And not only families but even whole nations and kingdoms were likewise consecrated; finally, because of the desire of Leo XIII, the whole human race, during the Holy Year of 1900, was solemnly consecrated to the Divine Heart. Neither should it be passed over in silence that the great number of Eucharistic Congresses, held especially in our own times, marvelously assisted in solidifying this royal power of Christ over mankind. These Congresses by calling upon each of the Faithful in every diocese, State, and nation, as well as in the whole Catholic world, to venerate and adore Jesus Christ hidden under the veils of the Eucharist and also by means of public discourses and sermons, of public Exposition of the Blessed Sacrament, and of wonderful processions, aim to acknowledge and proclaim the Kingship of Christ which was bestowed upon Him by heaven itself. Thus it can be said most truly that the Christian people, inspired by the grace of God, take from the silence and darkness of our sacred temples to carry in triumph through the pub-_ lic Streets that self-same Jesus, and thus aid to re-establish Him in His royal rights, Him whom on His entrance into this world unjust men refused to recognize.

Page 267

    ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 235 TRIUMPHS OF CHRIST SHOWN This Holy Year now drawing to a close appears to be a most propitious occasion in which to effect therefore Our holy purpose of which We have been writing, since God manifestly blessed this Jubilee by raising the minds and hearts of the Faithful to thoughts of heavenly things which surpass all joy, by bringing them back to His grace, by confirming them in His holy way, and by leading them to the attainment of spiritual perfection. Therefore, when We consider the innumerable petitions addressed to Us as well as the events of the Holy Year, We think that the day has finally arrived to announce that all mankind should honor Christ the King at a special feast. In this year, as We said at the beginning, Our Divine King, admirable in His Saints, has been magnified in a truly marvelous way by the elevation of a new band of His faithful followers to the honors of the altar. During this same year, all people have been led to admire by means of the Missionary Exposition the triumphs of Christ gained by the saintly missionaries who have extended His Kingdom here on earth. Finally, We also celebrated this year the Centenary of the Council of Nicea and thus commemorated the definition of the dogma of the consubStantiality of the Word made Flesh with the Father, a dogma upon which is founded the truth of the sovereign rule of the same Christ over all peoples. Therefore, in virtue of Our Apostolic authority, We

Page 268

    236 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST institute the Feast of Our Lord Jesus Christ King, and decree that it be celebrated everywhere on the last Sunday of October, that is, on the Sunday preceding the Feast of All Saints. Likewise We decree that on this very same day, annually, there is to be renewed the consecration of all mankind to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, an act of consecration which Our Predecessor of holy memory, Pius X, had previously commanded to be done every year. But this year We wish the consecration to take place on the Thirty-first of this month, on which occasion We Ourselves will celebrate solemn Pontifical Mass in honor of Christ the King. At that time the consecration to the Sacred Heart shall be made in Our presence. Moreover, it seems to Us that it would be impossible otherwise to close and crown this Holy Year in a more worthy and opportune manner or to render the full meed of our gratitude and of that of all Catholics to Christ, Eternal King of the Ages, for the benefits conferred upon us, the Church, and the whole Catholic world during the Holy Year just ended. There is no need, Venerable Brothers, for us to explain at great length to you why We instituted the Feast of Christ the King as a distinét feast despite the fact that the royal dignity of Christ appears to be already amply recognized, at least by implication, in other feasts already _ decreed. It is enough, We believe, to tell you that although the material objeét of all these feasts of Our Lord is Christ, the formal objeét is quite distinct from that of

Page 269

    ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 237 the new feast which expressly recognizes by name both the royalty and kingly power of Christ. The reason, moreover, why We decreed that this feast should be celebrated on a Sunday is because that day would give both to the clergy in the celebration of Mass and the recitation of the Divine Office, and to the laity, free from their daily occupations, an opportunity to render a special public aét of obedience and devotion to Our Lord. Moreover, the last Sunday of October, when the close of the liturgical year is at hand, seemed to Us a moést fitting time to order this celebration for the reason that it will so happen that the mySteries of the life of Jesus Christ commemorated during the year will then terminate and be crowned, as it were, by this great solemnity of Christ, the King, thus exalting before all men the glory of Him who triumphs in His Saints and in His eleét. Therefore, We desire that it should be your office, your special task, Venerable Brothers, to see to it that a course of sermons is preached every year on fixed days in every parish for the celebration of this feast so that the Faithful, inStructed fully in the nature, meaning, and importance of the feast, shall be brought to lead lives altogether worthy of those who claim to be loving and faithful subjects of the Divine King. BENEFITS EXPECTED As We close this letter, Venerable Brothers, it is Our great pleasure to point out briefly what advantages for

Page 270

    238 THE REIGN OF CHRIST the Church, for society, and for each Chriftian We hope will flow from this public cult of Christ, the King. In the first place, the very fact of Our acknowledging publicly these royal honors which belong to Our Lord, must of itself recall to our minds that the Church which was eStablished by Christ as a perfect society cannot but demand as her right, a right which she cannot renounce, full liberty and independence from the civil power. Moreover, the Church, in the exercise of her divine ministry of teaching, ruling and guiding to eternal happiness all who belong to the Kingdom of Christ, manifestly cannot depend on the will of others. The civil power, too, must allow to religious orders and sodalities of both sexes the exercise of a like liberty since they, over and above being a help to the Church and her pastors, also codperate greatly in the extension and development of the Kingdom of Christ, either because by their profession of the three religious vows they fight against the threefold concupiscence of the world or because by their leading a life of great perfection they show forth daily to all men that holiness which the Divine Founder of the Church foretold would be one of the marks of the true Church. The annual celebration of this feast will also become a means of recalling to the nations their duty of publicly — worshipping Christ, that to render Him obedience is not only the duty of private individuals but of rulers and governments as well. It will recall to them also that at

Page 271

    ENCYCLICAL ON JESUS CHRIST, KING 239 the final judgment the Christ who has been ignored, despised, and even driven from our midst, will revenge Himself for all the injuries He has received. His royal dignity demands that society as a whole should conform itself to the commandments of God and to the principles of the Christian life, first by the stabilization of its laws, then in the administration of justice, and above all things in preparing the souls of our young people for the acceptance of sound doétrine and the leading of holy lives. Finally, who can compute the power and holiness which the Faithful will obtain from meditating on these things, if they do so with the object of modelling themselves on the true Standards of the Christian life? Now because Christ Our Lord has been given all power in heaven and on earth, because all men redeemed by His Precious Blood have been made His subjects by a new and wondrous title of authority, because, lastly, this power of His extends to all mankind, it does not follow that we lose our liberty by reason of this rule of Christ over us. For it is necessary that Our Lord should rule over the mind of man, who by his intellectual submission shall firmly and at all times assent to the revealed truth and doétrines of Christ; that He rule over the will, which shall obey the divine laws and commands; that He rule over our hearts, which despising mere natural love shall love God above all things and be united to Him alone; that He rule over our bodies which as instruments, or as St. Paul says as “‘inStruments of justice to God”

Page 272

    es “2 PA “eay Sate a 240 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST (Rom. vi, 13) will promote the sanctity of the soul. If all these things are preached to the Faithful they undoubtedly will the more easily be led towards perfection. May the Lord grant, Venerable Brothers, that the many too outside His Kingdom shall long for and accept the sweet yoke of Christ, and that all men who are His subjects and His children, and their number indeed is great, shall through His mercy bear this yoke not because they are forced to do so, but with pleasure, with love, and in the spirit of holiness. Thus if our lives are made conformable to the laws of this Divine Kingdom we shall gather abundant fruit therein, and when called by Christ as good and faithful servants we too shall become sharers with Him in the Heavenly Kingdom of His everlasting happiness and glory. And on the anniversary of the Birth of Our Lord Jesus Christ this great gift We desire for you, Venerable Brothers, as the expression of Our fatherly affection. We impart, too, from the depths of Our heart, to you, Venerable Brothers, and to all your clergy and people, the Apostolic Blessing, a pledge of divine favors to come. Given at Rome, at St. Peter’s, on the Eleventh Day of December of the Holy Year, 1925, the fourth of Our Pontificate. ee Pore, Pius XI.

Page 273

    The text on this page is estimated to be only 43.00% accurate
    “SACRED HEART as au Reedy?

Page 274

Page 275

    . ee THE REPARATION DUE TO THE SACRED HEART * PIUS XI VENERABLE BROTHERS, GREETINGS AND APOSTOLIC BENEDICTION UR most merciful Redeemer, having assured () the salvation of the human race by His death on the Cross, before He ascended to His Heavenly Father, said these consoling words to His sorrowing Apostles and disciples: “Behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the world” (Matt. XXVili, 20). These happy words are also Our own source of hope and salvation, words which, Venerable Brothers, come readily to mind every time when, from this high watchtower, as it were, We look down upon the human family afflicted by so many grevious ills, and upon the Church, assailed without respite by attacks and plots. As a matter of fact, this promise of Our Divine Lord, as it once upon a time raised high the fallen spirits of the * Translated by Msgr. James H. Ryan, D.D., Ph.D.; copyrighted by the N. C. W. C. News Service. 243

Page 276

    244 THE REIGN OF CHRIST Apostles and urged them on to spread most zealously the a seed of the Gospel through all the earth, so also it has guided the Church to victory over the powers of Hell. Assuredly, Our Lord Jesus Christ has always assisted His Church; and most powerfully and effectively on those very occasions when she was encompassed by the greatest dangers and calamities. Christ then bestowed on her precisely those helps most necessary to meet the conditions of the times, by His wisdom which “reacheth from end to end mightily and ordereth all things sweetly” (Wisdom viii, 1). Nor in our own times has “‘the hand of the Lord been shortened” (Isaias lix, 1), especially on such occasions when an erroneous doétrine is being taught and spread about throughout the world, and by reason of which we fear that the sources of the Christian life may be dried up, for by such errors men are led to forsake the Christian life and the love of God. OBLIGATION TO MAKE AMENDS Since some Christians, perhaps, are ignorant of, and others are indifferent to, the sorrows which the most loving Jesus revealed to St. Margaret Mary Alacoque in His apparitions to her, as well as His wishes and desires which He manifested to mankind, all of which in the last analysis work to man’s advantage, it is Our pleasure, Venerable Brothers, to write you at some length of the obligation which rests upon all to make those

Page 277

    = iia =. ~ ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 245 amends which we owe to the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus. We feel certain that each of you will zealously teach to your own flocks what We herein write and that you will exhort them to do all that We wish to be done. From among all the proofs of the infinite goodness of Our Saviour none stands out more prominently than the fact that, as the love of the Faithful grew cold, He, Divine Love Itself, gave Himself to us to be honored by a very special devotion and that the rich treasury of the Church was thrown wide open in the interests of that devotion by which we honor the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus “in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge”’ (Col. ii, 3). As formerly Divine Goodness wished to exhibit to the human race, as it came from the Ark of Noe, a sign of the renewed covenant between them, “my bow which appears in the clouds” (Gen. ix, 14), so in our own so troubled times, while that heresy held sway which is known as Jansenism, the most insidious of all heresies, enemy of the love of God and of filial affection for Him—for this heresy preached that God was not so much to be loved by us as a Father as to be feared as an unrelenting Judge—the most kind Jesus manifested to the nations His Sacred Heart, unfolding our banner of peace and love to the breeze, an augury of certain victory in the battle before us. Wherefor Our Predecessor, Leo XIII, admiring as he did the great possibilities which devotion to the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus contains, with reason wrote in his

Page 278

    246 THE REIGN OF CHRIST Encyclical Annum Sacrum: “Just as when the newlyborn Church lay helpless under the yoke of the Czsars, there appeared in the heavens a cross, at once the sign and cause of the marvelous victory which was soon to follow,” so today behold before our very eyes there appears another most happy and holy sign, the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus, crowned by a brilliant cross set among raging flames. In this Sacred Heart we should place all our hopes, from it, too, we ask and await salvation. DEVOTION TO SACRED HEART PRAISED Are we not to see, Venerable Brothers, in that blessed sign and in the devotion which flows from it, the very substance of our holy religion, as well as the rules to guide us toward a more perfect form of life, since the Sacred Heart is the road which will most surely lead us to know intimately Jesus Christ and will cause our hearts to love more tenderly and to imitate Him more generously than we have heretofore done? Since this is so, it is no wonder then that Our Predecessors have always defended this most praiseworthy devotion to the Sacred Heart from the objections launched by those who will not accept it, that they have praised it most highly and have always promoted it with the greatest possible zeal in so far as the conditions of time and place seemed to demand such a¢tion. Certainly, it is due to nothing

Page 279

    ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 247 short of the inspiration of God that the childlike love of the Faithful for the Sacred Heart increases day by day; that pious associations to promote devotion to the Sacred Heart have come into being everywhere, and that the custom has become quite common of receiving Holy Communion on the First Friday of the month, a custom which had its origin in the wish of Jesus Christ Himself. Among the different praétices which directly accompany devotion to the Most Sacred Heart assuredly the foremost is the aét of consecration by which we offer to the Heart of Jesus both ourselves and all that belongs to us, recognizing that all we have comes to us from the infinite charity of God. Our Lord, having revealed to that moSst pure lover of His Sacred Heart, St. Margaret Mary, how much more He insisted on the immense love which He has borne toward us than on His rights over us, asked that mankind pay Him this tribute of devotion. Therefore the Saint herself, together with her Spiritual Director, Claude de la Colombiére, first of all offered Him an act of consecration. In the course of time individuals began paying Him the same tribute, then whole families and certain associations, and last of all, public officials, the inhabitants of cities, and whole nations. Due to the machinations of wicked persons, both in the century just ended and in this century, things had come to such a pass that men despised the rule of Christ and publicly declared war upon His Church by means of laws and popular enactments contrary to both the Divine

Page 280

    246." THE REIGN OF CHRIST and natural law, even going so far as to cry out publicly: “We will not have this man to reign over us” (Luke xix, 14). But by this act of consecration there burst forth, in startling contrast to these cries, the unanimous voice of the lovers of the Sacred Heart, rising to vindicate the ‘glory and defend the rights of the same Sacred Heart, “for he must reign” (I Cor. xv, 25) “may Thy Kingdom come.” Finally, at the beginning of the century as a happy consequence of all this, the whole human race which belongs by inherent right to Christ, “in whom all things are reéStablished” (Eph. i, 10), was consecrated to His Most Sacred Heart by Our Predecessor then happily reigning, Leo XIII, amid the applause of the whole Christian world. FEAST OF CHRIST THE KING INSTITUTED These auspicious and happy beginnings We Ourselves, through the great goodness of God, brought to completion, as was pointed out in Our Encyclical Quas Primas, on the occasion when, acceding to the desires and wishes expressed by numerous bishops and the Faithful, We instituted at the close of the Jubilee Year the Feast of Christ the King of all men, which feast We ordered to be celebrated solemnly all over the Christian world. By that act We not only brought forth clearly into the light of day the fact of the supreme dominion of Christ over all things, over civil society and the home, as well as over individuals; We also experienced beforehand the %

Page 281

    Pe Pee ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 249 joy of that most happy day when the whole world will submit joyfully and willingly to the sweet yoke of Christ the King. Wherefore We commanded that, together with the celebration of this feast, there should be renewed annually the aét of consecration, and this We did in order to obtain more surely and in greater quantities the fruits of such a consecration and to bind with Christian love in the communion of peace all peoples to the heart of the King of Kings and Sovereign of Sovereigns. Moreover, to all these expressions of veneration, and especially to that most fruitful one, the aét of consecration, which by means of the institution of the Feast of Christ the King has been, as it were, again confirmed, it is expedient that another be added, and of this last, Venerable Brothers, We wish to speak now somewhat at length. We refer to the act of expiation or of reparation, as it is called, to be made to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. DUTY OF REPARATION IMPOSED If in the act of consecration the intention to exchange, as it were, for the love of the Creator the love of us creatures Stands out most prominently, there follows almost naturally from this another fact, namely, that if this same Uncreated Love has either been passed over through forgetfulness or saddened by reason of our sins, then we should repair such outrages, no matter in what manner they have occurred. Ordinarily, we call this duty,

Page 282

    250 : THE REIGN OF CHRIST reparation. If we are held to both these duties for the same reasons, we are held to the duty of making reparation by the most powerful motives of justice and of love of justice, in order to expiate the injury done God by our sins and to reéStablish, by means of penance, the Divine order which has been violated; and of love, in order to suffer together with Christ, patient and covered with opprobrium, so that we may bring to Him, in so far as our human weakness permits, some comfort in His: sufferings. Since we are all sinners, burdened with many offenses, we should honor God. This should take place not only by means of that cult by which we adore, in the veneration due Him from us, His Infinite Majesty, or by means of prayer when we recognize His supreme dominion over us, or by acts of thanksgiving when we praise His infinite generosity toward us; it is necessary to do more than all this. We must also satisfy the just anger of God because of “the numberless sins, offenses, and negligences” which we have committed. Therefore, we must add to the act of consecration, by virtue of which we offer ourselves to God and become thereby, as it were, sacred to Him by reason of the sanctity which necessarily flows from an a¢t of consecration, as the Angelic Doétor teaches (“SummaTheol.” IIa-Ilae, q. 81, a. 8, c.),an act of expiation, by means of which all our faults are blotted out, lest perchance the sanctity of infinite Justice spurn our arrogant unworthiness and look upon our gift as something to be rejected rather than to be accepted. a ee ae Pa ee ig

Page 283

    ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 251 . All men are obliged to make reparation since, according to the teachings of our holy Faith, our souls have been disfigured, as a result of the pitiable fall of Adam, by original sin; we are subject also to our passions and corrupted in a truly sad way, and have thus made ourselves worthy of eternal damnation. It is true that the proud philosophers of this world deny the above truth, resurrecting in its place the ancient heresy of Pelagius which conceded to human nature a certain inborn goodness which, by our own powers, raises us up to ever higher levels of perfection. These false theories, born of human pride, have been condemned by the Apostle who admonishes us that “we were by nature children of wrath” (Eph. ii, 3). As a matter of fact, from the very creation of the world mankind has recognized, in one way or another, the obligation of making reparation, and impelled, as it were, by a natural instinct, has tried to placate the Deity by offering Him public sacrifices. TRUTH ANNOUNCED BY PSALMIST But no effort on our part would have been great enough to expiate the faults of men if the Son of God had not assumed human nature in order to redeem us. The Saviour of mankind announced this truth speaking through the Psalmist: “Sacrifice and oblation Thou wouldst not: but a body Thou hast fitted to Me. Holocausts for sin did not please Thee. Then said I: Behold I come” (Heb. xi, 5-7). In truth “He hath borne our

Page 284

    252 ; THE REIGN OF CHRIST infirmities and carried our sorrows: He was wounded for our iniquities” (Isaias liii, 4, 5), “who His own self bore our sins in His body on the tree” (I Peter ii, 24), “blotting out the handwriting of the decree that was against us, which was contrary to us, and He hath taken the same out of the way, fastening it to the cross” (Col. ii, 14), so “that we, being dead to sins, should live to justice” (I Peter ii, 24). . Though the ample redemption of Christ more than abundantly satisfied for all our offenses (Col. ii, 13), nevertheless, by reason of that marvelous disposition of Divine Wisdom by which we may complete those “things that are wanting of the sufferings of Christ in our own flesh, for His body, which is the Church” (Col. i, 24), we are able, in fact, we should add to the acts of praise and satisfaction which ‘“‘Chrigst in name of sinners has presented to God,” our own acts of praise and satisfaction. However, we must always remember that the expiatory value of our acts depends solely on the bloody sacrifice of Christ, which is renewed without interruption on our altars in an unbloody manner, since in both cases “the Victim is the same, the One who offers Himself by means of the ministry of the priesthood is the same, the very same One who offered Himself on the Cross, the only difference being in the manner in which the sacrifice is made” (Conc. Trid. Sess. xxii, c. 2). For this reason we must bring together, in the august sacrifice of the Blessed Eucharist, the aét of immolation made by

Page 285

    ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 253 the priest with that of the Faithful, so that they, too, may offer themselves up as “‘a living sacrifice, holy, pleasing unto God” (Rom. xii, 1). Therefore, St. Cyprian dared to affirm that “‘the sacrifice of Our Lord is not complete as far as our sanétification is concerned unless our offerings and sacrifices correspond to His passion” (Ep. 63, n. 381). The Apostle admonished us that “bearing about in our body the mortification of Jesus” (II Cor. iv, 10) and “buried together with him by Baptism unto death” (Rom. vi, 4), not only should we “crucify our flesh with the vices and concupiscences” (Gal. v, 24) “flying the corruption of that concupiscence which is in the world” (II Peter i, 4), but also that the “‘life of Jesus be made manifest in our bodies” (II Cor. iv, 10), and, having become partakers in His holy and eternal priesthood, we should offer up “‘gifts and sacrifices for sins’ (Heb. v, 1). For not only are they partakers in the mysteries of this priesthood and in the duty of offering sacrifices and satisfaction to God, who have been appointed by Jesus Christ the High Priest as the ministers of such sacrifices, to offer God “a clean oblation in every place from the rising of the sun even to the going down” (Malach, i, 10), but also those Christians called, and rightly so, by the Prince of the Apostles, “a chosen generation, a kingly priesthood” (I Peter ii, 9), who are to offer “‘sacrifices for sin” (Heb. v, 1) not only for themselves but for all mankind, and this in much the

Page 286

    254 ‘ THE REIGN OF CHRIST same way as every priest and “high priest taken from among men is ordained for men in the things that appertain to God” (Heb. v, 1). BENEFITS OF OBLATION AND SACRIFICE In the degree to which our oblation and sacrifice will the more perfectly correspond to the sacrifice of Our Lord, that is to say, to the extent to which we have immolated love of self and our passions and crucified our flesh in that myStical crucifixion of which the Apostle writes, so much the more plentiful fruits of propitiation and of expiation will we garner for ourselves and for others. A wondrous bond joins all the Faithful to Christ, the same bond which unites the head with the other members of the body, namely, the communion of saints, a bond full of mystery which we believe in as Catholics and by virtue of which individuals and nations are not only united to one another but likewise with the head itself, “who is Christ: from whom the whole body, being compacted and fitly joined together, by what every joint supplieth, according to the operation in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body, unto the edifying of itself in charity” (Eph. v, 15, 16). This, too, was the prayer which Jesus Christ Himself, the Mediator between God and men, at the hour of His death made to His Father, “I in them and Thou in Me: that they may be made perfect in one” (John xvii, 23). As the act of consecration proclaims and confirms our

Page 287

    ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 255 union with Christ, so the act of expiation, by purifying us from sins, is the beginning of such union; our participation in the sufferings of Christ perfects it; the offering we make to Him of our sacrifices for the welfare of our brethren brings such union to its final consummation. This was precisely the design of the mercy of Jesus when He unveiled to our gaze His Sacred Heart, surrounded by the emblems of His Passion, and aflame with the fire of love, that we, on the one hand, perceiving the infinite malice of sin, and on the other, filled with a knowledge of the infinite love of Our Redeemer, might detest more cordially sin and substitute for it an ardent love of Him. The spirit of expiation or of reparation has always played one of the chief rdles in the devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. Certainly, reparation is most consonant, with the origin, nature, efficacy, and particular practices of this special devotion, a fact confirmed by history and the customs of the Faithful, by the sacred liturgy, and by the official documents of Roman Pontifts. As a matter of fact, on the occasion when Jesus revealed Himself to St. Margaret Mary, though He then insisted on the immensity of His love, at the same time, with sorrowful mien, He grieved over the great number of horrible outrages heaped upon Him by the ingratitude of mankind. He used then these words, words which should be graven on the hearts of all pious souls so as never to be forgotten by them: “Behold this Heart which has loved men so much, which has heaped upon them so

Page 288

    256 _ THE REIGN OF CHRIST many benefits. In exchange for this infinite love It finds ingratitude; instead It meets with forgetfulness, indifference, outrages, and all this at times even from souls bound closely to It in the bonds of a very special love.” COMMUNION OF REPARATION URGED In order to make reparation for such faults, He, among other requests, made this special request as one which would be most acceptable to Him, namely, that the Faithful, inspired by the intention of making reparation, should receive Holy Communion—and for this reason it is called the “Communion of Reparation”—and for an hour should practise acts and prayers of reparation— which devotion is rightly called the ““Holy Hour.” The Church has not only approved these devotions but has enriched them with very special spiritual favors. But how can we, one may ask, believe that Christ reigns happily in Heaven if it is possible to console Him by such acts as those of reparation? We answer in the language of St. Augustine, words quite apposite to our subject: “The soul which truly loves will comprehend what I say” (In Ioan. Evang. Tract. xxvi, 4). Every soul which burns with true love of God, if it but turns its thoughts to the past, sees in meditation and can contemplate Jesus suffering for mankind, afflicted by grief in the midst of sorrows suffered “for us men and for our salvation,” weighed down by agony and re 

Page 289

    VS iN ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 257 proaches, “bruised for our sins” (Isaias liii, 5), in the very act of healing us by His bruises. With so much the more understanding can pious souls meditate upon these mysteries if they appreciate that the sins and crimes of men, no matter when committed, were the real reason why the Son of God was condemned to death and that even sins committed now would be able of themselves to cause Christ to die a death accompanied by the same sufferings and agonies as His death on the cross, since every sin must be said to renew in a certain way the Passion of Our God, “crucifying again to themselves the Son of God and making Him a mockery” (Heb. vi, 6). And if, in view of our own future sins, foreseen by Him, the soul of Jesus became sad even unto death, there can be no doubt that by His prevision at the same time of our acts of reparation He was in some way comforted when “there appeared an angel from heaven” (Luke xxii, 43) to console that Heart of His bowed down with sorrow and anguish. At the present time, we too, in a marvelous but no less true manner, may and ought to console that Sacred Heart which is being wounded continually by the sins of thoughtless men, since—and we read this also in the sacred liturgy—Chris&t Himself grieved over the fact that He was abandoned by His friends. For He said, in the words of the Psalmist, “My heart hath expected reproach and misery. And I looked for one that would grieve together with Me, but there was none: and for one

Page 290

    258 THE REIGN OF CHRIST that would comfort Me, and I found none” (Psalm Ixviii, 21). RECALLS AUGUSTINE’S WORDS To the above we may add that the expiatory passion -of Jesus Christ is renewed and in a certain manner continued in His mystic body, the Church. To use again the words of St. Augustine, “Christ suffered all that He had to suffer: nothing at all is lacking to the number of His sufferings. Therefore His sufferings are complete, but in Him as in the head; there remain even now the sufferings of Christ to be endured in the body” (Psalm Ixxxvi). In fact, Christ Himself made the same statement, for to Saul “breathing out threatenings: and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord” (Adts ix, 1), He said, “I am Jesus whom thou persecutest’”’ (Acts ix, 5). By this He plainly affirmed that persecutions visited on the Church are in reality directed against the Head of the Church. Therefore, Christ, suffering in His mystical body, with reason desires to have us as companions in His own acts of expiation. He asks to be united with us for since we “‘are the body of Christ and members of member’’ (I Cor. xii, 27), in so far as the Head suffers so also should the members suffer with it (I Cor. xii, 26). CHURCH OPPOSED BY GOVERNMENTS Now, anyone who uses his eye and mind, if he but think of this world “seated in wickedness” (I John vy,

Page 291

    ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 259 19), can see, as We Stated above, how urgent, especially in our own times, is the need of expiation or of reparation. There come to Our ears from every side the cries of nations, whose rulers or governments have actually risen up and have conspired together against the Lord and against His Church (Cf. Psalm ii, 2). We have seen both human and Divine rights overthrown in these countries, churches destroyed to their very foundations, religious and consecrated virgins driven from their homes, thrown into prison, made to go hungry, treated with unspeakable savagery. We have seen troops of boys and girls, torn from the bosom of Holy Mother Church, made to deny and blaspheme Christ, and urged to commit the worst sins against purity. We have seen a whole Christian people menaced, oppressed, in constant peril of _ apostasy from the Faith or of a moét barbarous death. ‘These happenings, sorrowful as they are, seem to have been foreseen in such calamities as are now occurring, and to anticipate “the beginning of those sorrows” which will be revealed by “the man of sin who is lifted above all that is called God or that is worshipped” (II Thes. Nor is that other spectacle, Venerable Brothers, less sad that even among the Faithful, washed as they have | been by Baptism in the Blood of the Innocent Lamb and enriched by His grace, we encounter so many of every Station in life who, ignorant of things Divine, are potsoned by false doétrines and live a sinful life far from

Page 292

    260 . THE REIGN OF CHRIST their Father’s house, without the light of the true Faith, without the joy of hope in a future life, deprived of the Strength and comfort which come with the spirit of love. Of them one may say quite truthfully that they are immersed in darkness and in the shadow of death. Moreover, disrespect for the discipline of the Church is on the increase among the Faithful as also disrespect for ancient traditions, upon which the Christian life has been built, by which domestic society is governed, by which the sanctity of marriage is protected. The process of educating youth has been weakened or spoiled by too much effeminacy, and even the right to educate children in their religion has been taken away from the Church. Christian modesty is forgotten, sad to say, both in our manner of life and of dress, especially by women. There has come into existence, too, an uncontrollable desire to possess the base things of this world, an unreasonable regard for civil interests, an intemperate searching after popular applause, a despisal of legitimate authority and of the Word of God, by all of which the Faith itself is shaken to its foundations or placed in jeopardy. HOUR OF PROPHECY ARRIVED There must be added to this accumulation of evils the sloth and laziness of those who, like the Apostles asleep or like those disciples who had fled away, since they are not firmly rooted in the Faith, have shamefully abandoned Christ, burdened with sorrows and attacked cS ao ie a 4 a

Page 293

    ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 261 by the satellites of Satan, as well as the perfidy of those others who, following in the footsteps of Judas the traitor, either with sacrilegious temerity approach Holy Communion or go over to the camp of the enemy. There thus comes to mind, almost involuntarily, the thought that we have arrived at the hour prophesied by Our Lord when He said: ‘“‘And because iniquity has abounded, the charity of many shall grow cold” (Matt. xxiv, 12). If the Faithful, burning with love for the suffering Christ, should meditate on all these considerations, it would be unthinkable that they should not expiate with greater zeal both their own and the faults of others, that they should not repair the honor of Christ, be filled with zeal for the eternal salvation of souls. Assuredly, We may adapt to our own age to describe it what the Apostle wrote: “When sin abounded, grace did more abound” (Rom. v, 20), for even though the sinfulness of man has greatly increased, by the grace of the Holy Ghost, there has also increased the number of the Faithful who most gladly try to make satisfaction to the Divine Heart of Jesus for the numerous injuries heaped on Him. What is more, they joyfully offer themselves to Christ as victims for sin. Anyone who has been considering in a spirit of love all that has been recalled to his mind up to this, if he has impressed these thoughts, as it were, upon the fleshy tablets of his heart, such a one assuredly cannot but abhor and flee all sin as the greatest of evils. He will

Page 294

    13 aa THE REIGN OF CHRIST also offer himself whole and entire to the will of God " and will Strive to repair the injured majesty of God by constant prayer, by voluntary penances, by patient suffering of all those ills which shall befall him; in a word, he will so organize his life that in all things it will be inspired by the spirit of reparation. From this spirit of reparation there have been born many families of religious men and women, who, day and night, in tireless manner, have set before themselves the task of taking, in as far as that is possible, the place of the Angel who comforted Jesus in the garden. Likewise, certain pious associations, approved by the Holy See and enriched with indulgences, have as their ideal to make reparation for sin by means of certain practices of piety and of the virtues. And not to speak of all these holy works, We select out one for mention, namely, the frequent practice of making solemn reparation not only by individuals but often by whole parishes, dioceses, and even nations. DESIRES DEVOTION TO BE GENERAL Venerable Brothers, just as the aét of consecration, which began in a small way and afterwards came into general use, achieved, by reason of Our approval, the splendid purposes and ends desired, so We wish ardently that this devotion of reparation, which has already been introduced and is the pious custom of certain places, possess the seal of highest approval of Our Apostolic

Page 295

    ey ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 263 authority, so that it likewise may come to be prattised universally and in a most solemn manner by all Christian peoples. We eStablish, therefore, and We order that annually, on the Feast of the Sacred Heart, in all the churches of the world, there take place a solemn act of reparation (the same formula must be used by all and is the one attached to this Encyclical *) to our most loving Redeemer, in order that we may, by this aét, make reparation for our own sins and may repair the rights which have been violated of Christ, the King of Kings and our most loving Master. Nor can We doubt, Venerable Brothers, that from this holy praétice now reéstablished and extended to the whole Church We may expect many signal blessings, not only for individuals but for society itself, domestic and civil, since Christ Himself promised to St. Margaret Mary that “He would shower abundantly His graces upon those who rendered this honor to His Sacred Heart.” Assuredly sinners “looking on Him whom they pierced” (John xix, 37), Stricken by the sorrow of the Church, detesting the injuries offered to the King of Kings ‘“‘will return to themselves” (Isaias xlvi, 8), for they cannot become obStinate in sin in the presence of Him whom they have wounded “coming in the clouds of heaven’ (Matt. xxvi, 64), for then too late and without hope, shall they “bewail themselves of Him” (Apoc. i, 7). * This formula will be found on page 203 of this volume.

Page 296

    264 THE REIGN OF CHRIST But the just will “‘be justified still and the holy will be justified still” (Apoc. xxii, 11). They will consecrate themselves with renewed ardor to the service of their King. Seeing Him so despised and so often attacked, seeing too that so many injuries are inflicted on Him, certainly their zeal for the salvation of souls will be increased when they hear the lament of the Divine Victim, “What profit is there in My Blood?” (Psalm xxix, 10) and, at the same time, they will meditate upon the joy of the Sacred Heart “‘over the sinner who doth penance” (Luke xv, 7). PRAYER FOR GOD’S MERCY We, before all other things, hope and greatly desire that the justice of God, which would have pardoned Sodom if only ten just had been found therein, shall be exercised with more mercy towards all mankind. The Faithful, in union with Christ, the Mediator and our Head, will pray for and ask from God such mercy. May the most gracious Mother of God be propitious to these Our wishes and to these Our commands; she who gave us Christ the Redeemer, who watched over Him, and, at the foot of the Cross, offered Him a victim for our sins. She, too, by reason of her wondrous union with Him and of a most singular grace of God, became and is piously known as the Mother of Reparation. Confiding in her intercession with Jesus, “the one mediator pf God and man” (I Tim. ii, 5), who wished to asso 

Page 297

    ENCYCLICAL ON REPARATION 265 ciate his own Mother with Himself as the advocate of sinners, as the dispenser and mediatrix of grace, We impart from Our heart, as an augury of Divine favors and a proof of Our fatherly love, to you, Venerable Brothers, and to all the flock confided to your care, the Apostolic Blessing. Given at Rome, at St. Peter’s, the ninth of May, 1928, the seventh year of Our Pontificate. Prius XI.

Page 298

Page 299

    The text on this page is estimated to be only 28.00% accurate
    a

Page 300

Page 301

    thi

Page 302

Page 303

    The text on this page is estimated to be only 29.38% accurate
    : é "4 . ~* ‘ a a

Page 304

