 heaven,” he ven¬
tured, thoughtfully. “It may be a deception of the devil, you
know! We shall see. We shall see.” He arose as a sign of dis-
missal. “We shall give our opinion later on,” he added to Maria
Rosa.
The devil! That was a possibility that had never occurred to
Lucia or to her mother. The reading of Maria Rosa had not car¬
ried her very deeply into mystical theology. It is hardly probable
that she had read the difficult pages in which Saint Teresa of
Avila recorded her torments at the hands of friends who suspected
that her visions and ecstacies had been suggested by the enemy
of God and man. Nor were such timid counselors necessarily to
be blamed. For the Church has learned, from centuries of experi¬
ence, that evil spirits can counterfeit the appearances of sanctity,
and that all such manifestations must be tested thoroughly before
they are accepted as coming from God. There was once a notorious
impostor in Spain who deceived many holy persons by pretending
to have the stigmata of Christ and to live on the sacred Host
alone.
Lucia went home exhausted, abashed, and terrified. Nor was
her anguish at all lessened by the utter abhorrence, of her mother,
who lost no opportunity, from then on, to belabor her with words
and sometimes even with blows and kicks. The girl felt like an
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFgK55bTvxIk1ABWWj4ikjoBCgrMEpEHlIu_IY5_eMIQaUnltmeXO7NnhHttDIu9C7rnI3zw9nBxR_CUAPa80jUFcTMbWLOHNMEHmDvMx4l00JtW4gMsk4vGqPOal8W3tb3b_kfEA=w491-h810-v0
outcast as she glided through the house and stole out again to seek
the quiet of the old well where she had once seen the Angel, and
where she had shed so many tears and said so many prayers in
other times of woe. And there she found Francisco and Jacinta,
still praying.
Jacinta ran to embrace her and to ask how she had got on with
the Senhor Prior. They listened wide-eyed, with growing indigna¬
tion, as she repeated many of the Paroco’s questions and his final
remarks.
“It’s not the devil,” cried Jacinta. “No! They say the devil is
very foul and ugly, and he is under the ground, in hell. And that
Lady is so beautiful, and we saw her go up to heaven!” 2
Francisco was of the same opinion and nodded approval when
his sister continued to encourage Lucia with:
“Look here! We don’t have to be afraid of anything. That Lady
will always help us. And she is such a friend of ours!” 3
This was undeniable. Yet all that night Lucia lay awake,
thinking of the Prior’s words, and wondering, as many others have
wondered, if she could have become, without knowing it, the
instrument of God’s enemy to bring contempt and ridicule upon
everything holy. Night after night she suffered as only children
can suffer when there is no older person who will understand
their enormous perplexities and griefs. Every day under the hearten¬
ing assurances of her young cousins the fears and doubts of
solitary hours melted into the warm sunlight and the fragrance
of mint and rosemary, as they all carelessly followed the sheep
over the Serra. It was different when darkness skulked about her,
and the same fear returned to lour by her bedside or to trouble
her dreams. As the time approached for the July rendezvous with
the White Lady, she was so tired and limp from this constant
battering of invisible foes that she decided, at last, that the Prior
must be right; and on the afternoon of July 12, she informed her
2 Memoir II, p. 18.
s Memoir I, p. 15.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG317NiDxxBS1BcHy_d-nPijl3KAylZCu7vZ4TdoQlD0VOUiFM8QaAG8qqxyMOVdwdu5QhjewZw4w2kHUy31n8zJbWLVQEw4N_pXfFdqej3b6McYoml4D-UTMjMXMx0-wHWEm1y6w=w491-h810-v0
two little cousins that she did not intend to go to Cova da Ina
the following day.
After the first howl of dismay, there was a long earnest
discussion.
“How can you think it was the devil?” asked Francisco. “Didn’t
you see Our Lady and Our Lord in that great light? And how
can we go without you, if you are the one who has to talk?”
“I’m not going,” said Lucia.
“Well, I’m going.” Francisco was very positive.
“And so am I,” added Jacinta, “because that Lady told us to.”
Later the boy found Lucia at the threshing floor and made a final
effort to persuade her.
“Look, you’re going tomorrow?”
“I’m not going. I told you I’m never going any more.”
“Don’t you see it can’t be the devil? God is already so sad
over so many sins, and now if you don’t go, He will be sadder.”
“I tell you I’m not going!” 4
Lucia held to this determination. Maria Rosa, who had her own
ways of knowing what was happening, must have been relieved
that night. And on the following morning she could hardly dis¬
guise her satisfaction when she noticed that her youngest daughter
still had no intention of taking the sheep to Cova da Iria.
It was only when the time approached to turn them loose that
Lucia felt a sudden desire to see Jacinta and Francisco. Running
to the Marto cottage, she found them both kneeling beside a bed,
weeping desolately.
“Aren’t you going?” she demanded.
“We don’t dare go without you!” they wailed.
“Well, I’ve changed my mind, and I’m going.”
They arose with great joy. Francisco said they had been praying
for her all night.
“Vamosl” Off they went by the zig-zag paths they knew so
4 Memoir IV, p. n.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGwG-kfZZZRxFOI2mLOy2-MNsiK87_qGC5qSo58x-xfQZTZatk90T90niOsNhtYxnUEAXma1b0w-c8tKaaqEho3t2cF8XHNWhBxcyjRYdb7jJY-fUpGSoLOJJqrEny28-KmFN4caQ=w491-h810-v0
79 Our Lady of Fatima
well across the two and a half miles of dusty terrain between
Aljustrel and the Cova. It was the month of the Precious Blood
of Our Lord; and July in that part of Portugal can be oppressively
hot. As noon approached, a sultry stillness settled over the fields
where the sparse hay had already been cut and stacked in tight
bundles around the trunks of the olive trees. Sweating men and
boys, who had been digging the first little round potatoes from
the red soil with great pronged hooks, began to steal away early
for their siestas. Trees loaded with ripe plums were sagging visibly,
cabbages along the roadside were drooping and wilting. Occasional
sounds like the chirping of cicadas, the thwacking of flails on
some farm in the resonant valley below Cabe^o, or the squeaking
of a cart on the glaring road, had a strange exaggerated quality
that was startling. The oxen and sheep seemed almost too oppressed
to thrust -their noses into the muddy water of the Lagoa. A few
darkly clad women, and an old man or two passed silently over
the fields or down the highway under great black umbrellas. The
sky was a huge blue glare of light, the dry air, unmoistened by rain
for many weeks, was hard to breathe.
Yet on this particular thirteenth of July, in 1917, there was
something unusual afoot in all the villages and fields of the Serra.
Even before the children arrived within sight of the Cova da
Iria they must have become aware of it. For all over the mountains
and beyond people had been hearing, by the mysterious grapevine
that disperses news so thoroughly and so fast in country places,
of what had taken place on the feast of Saint Anthony. An astonish¬
ing number had made up their minds to be on hand for the next
apparition. Maria Carreira had come again from Moita, bringing
her crippled son, her incredulous husband, and all her daughters.
Among the most fervent believers was another resident of Moita,
one Jose Alves, who had told the Prior of Fatima to his face that
hi^ theory about diabolical intervention was all nonsense. For
who had ever heard of the devil inciting people to pray?
When Ti Marto arrived (for he had decided to take the day
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG5qiUFxzoN0ZK89aIttzc_CNPhoSBN3hgrQKA8A-2zMeabXnZqaVlJRKbwiuUkzCrZPM3Ktk1FiZFVJT0JZnqksdNsa9mf7QRVhM61ohDP1Nd3HUIA51SvW0wsvL5oSdCrRQ_jrA=w491-h810-v0
8o Our Lady of Fatima
off and see what his children were up to), the crowd was so dense
that it took him a long while to elbow his way through to where
Jacinta stood with Francisco and Lucia. Portuguese crowds are
orderly and well behaved, as a rule, but this one troubled him a
little. “The power of the world!” he reflected philosophically. Ffe
still chuckles when he remembers some of the richly dressed and
adorned persons who had arrived “from who knows where,”
ladies in long skirts and wide-brimmed “picture” hats, gentlemen
with fancy vests, very high collars and derbies. Ti Marto found
them ridiculous. “ Ai, Jesus! There were fine gentlemen who came
to laugh and to make fun of people who didn’t know how to read
handwriting. But it was we who had the laugh on them. . . .
Ui! Poor little wretches! They didn’t have any faith at all. Then
how could they believe in Our Lady?” Most of the people, how¬
ever, were peasants of the Serra, the women generally barefoot,
with black shawls over their heads, the men wearing their Sunday
suits, and great hobnailed boots. And among them Ti Marto
encountered his wife and Maria Rosa.
It may be that his Olimpia had been listening to that last tense
conversation of the three children in the bedroom of her house.
For no sooner had they scampered away, all their sorrow turned
to relief, than she hurried to her brother’s house to tell Maria Rosa
what had occurred. “Ai, Jesus!” The heavens seemed once more
to be crashing down about the tired head of Lucia’s mother. After
all she had been through, to think that the silly cachopa was
going off to keep a tryst with the devil! Arming themselves with
some holy candles and a supply of matches, the two women started
for Cova da Iria, evidently with some notion of exorcising the
evil spirit if he should turn up there again. They were too late
to head off the children, if that was their intent; however, there
they were, clutching their candles and ready to light them if need
be. And with them were some 2,000 to 3,000 other persons, devout
or curious, waiting to see what v/ould happen.
The children, in the center of the throng, were now reciting
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFAZ77KaMB31la1d-YgZHI89FLxjMVl2IgIJ_FNu74wIob85Fpxmq8b1j7yqGUamrGcVEz-1QrNHZRadIY0lKZIKdykiUPFkiLgk17A1W_VYvBcN0o2i7iBTCCumxT2vZ08PiwDbQ=w491-h810-v0
the Rosary and gazing with expectancy toward the east. They
paid no attention to a rude woman who was berating them as
impostors. Jacinta and Francisco did not even see their father.as
he took his place beside them, ready to help them if necessary.
Ti Marto was looking at Lucia. Fler face had a deathlike pallor,
bde heard her say:
“Take off your hats! Take off your hats, for I see Our Lady
already!” Fde saw something like a small cloud descend upon
the azinheira; and suddenly, as the sunlight became dimmer, a
cool fresh breeze blew over the hot Serra. Then he heard something
that sounded to him, he says, “like a horse-fly in an empty
water-pot”; but neither he nor Maria Carreira nor any of the rest,
except the children, could distinguish any words.
By this time all the stimuli of the sensory world—the crowd,
the sun, ■ the breeze, all the trivialities of space and time—had
fallen away from the three young mystics as some supernatural
force descended upon and drew them up into that white radiance
where once more with inexpressible joy they saw the Lady glide
to the top of the little tree.
“Vocemece que me quere?” asked Lucia as before. “What do
you want of me?”
“I want you to come here on the thirteenth day of the coming
month, and to continue to say five decades of the Rosary every
day in honor of Our Lady of the Rosary to obtain the peace of
the world and the end of the war. For She alone will be able
to help.”
Lucia said, “I wish to ask you to tell us who you are, and to
perform a miracle so that everyone will believe that you have
appeared to us!”
“Continue to come here every month,” answered the Lady. “In
October I will tell you who I am and what I wish, and will perform
a miracle that everyone will have to believe.”
Here Lucia thought of some requests that various people had
asked her to present. “I don’t remember just what they were,”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF05VsheXGLLH735N1Bb1B1Bm4V3LmehvqLRiB9QfZFqM3xfhdNGwzfSk7hJh-FPRw3Y4Ina0baY8WBo8v0m9RaWfcidntH9M-q-XqCzVX5yOpVB41ubDbj68M_zeSbhfA9kSaCRQ=w491-h810-v0
she wrote in 1941. But it is believed that one of them was for
the cure of Maria Carreira’s crippled son; and the Lady is said to
have answered that she would not cure him, but would give him
a means of livelihood if he would say his Rosary every day. What
Lucia now recalls is her insistence on the daily use of the beads to
gain graces during the year.
“Sacrifice yourselves for sinners,” she repeated, “and say many
times, especially when you make some sacrifice:
“ ‘O Jesus, it is for your love, for the conversion of sinners and
in reparation for the sins committed against the Immaculate Heart
of Mary.’
As the Lady spoke the last words, she opened her lovely hands
as before, and poured down from them the revealing and pene¬
trating radiance that had warmed the hearts of the children on
the previous occasions. But this time it seemed to pass into the
earth, disclosing beneath—and these are Lucia’s words, written in
1941—“a sea of fire; and plunged in this fire the demons and
the souls, as if they were red-hot coals, transparent and black or
bronze-colored, with human forms, which floated about in the
conflagration, born by the flames which issued from it with clouds
of smoke, falling on all sides as sparks fall in great conflagrations
—without weight or equilibrium, among shrieks and groans of
sorrow and despair which horrify and cause to shudder with fear.
“The devils were distinguished by horrible and loathsome forms
of animals frightful and unknown, but transparent like black coals
that have turned red-hot.” 5
The children were so frightened that they would have died,
they felt, if they had not been told they were all going to heaven.
After gazing in fascinated horror at the gruesome spectacle which
not even Saint Teresa has described more fearfully, they raised
their eyes as if in desperate appeal to the Lady who stood gazing
down on them with sombre tenderness.
“You see hell, where the souls of poor sinners go,” she said
5 Memoir IV; also III, in almost the same words.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEh6AATnZEtX0pgnNkkBiAUHKmaMkUQp6Ws4yHEpz7RLdwlscRrpm29X7rVKZ2gy7ZLG_dYRyMpaatKpfDJGibZfml1TJ-piwH0G58VZNE20SIV-BUMG5kHq4e8gMFj3G_dqis8=w491-h810-v0
at length. “To save them God wishes to establish in the world
the devotion to my Immaculate Heart. If they do what I will tell
you, many souls will be saved, and there will be peace. The
war is going to end. But if they do not stop offending God, another
and worse one will begin in the reign of Pius XI.
“When you shall see a night illuminated by an unknown
light, know that it is the great sign that God gives you that He
is going to punish the world for its crimes by means of war,
of hunger, and of persecution of the Church and of the Holy
Father.
“To prevent this I come to ask the consecration of Russia to
my Immaculate Heart and the Communion of reparation on the
first Saturdays. If they listen to my requests, Russia will be con¬
verted and there will be peace. If not she will scatter her errors
through the world, provoking wars and persecutions of the Church.
The good will be martyrized, the Holy Father will have much to
suffer, various nations will be annihilated.* * * * 6
“In the end my Immaculate Heart will triumph. The Holy
Father will consecrate Russia to me, and a certain period of peace
will be granted to the world.
“In Portugal the dogma of the Faith will always be kept.
“Tell this to no one. Francisco, yes, you may tell him.
“When you say the Rosary, say after each mystery, ‘O my
Jesus, pardon us and deliver us from the fire of hell. Draw all
souls to heaven, especially those in most need.’ ” 7
The Lady then told the children a final secret which has never
been revealed, and which Lucia will not disclose until the Queen
of Heaven herself commands her to do so. She has never told it
even to her confessors.
8 Explaining this to me in July, 1946, Sister Maria das Dores (Lucia) made the
prophecy even more specific, saying that Our Lady desired that Russia (not “the
world” as in many inaccurate accounts) be consecrated to her Immaculate Heart
by the Pope and all the bishops in the world on one special day. If not, every
country in the world without exception will be chastised “by the errors of Russia.”
7 An erroneous form of this prayer, limiting it to the souls in purgatory, is current
in the United States.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEGiAhdrd2WnLGghvGIDjsA_7oa1fL4zMktaeobXEZXGu65SCoRPoao4i4AwUHrFU11Zh2-t_f6USmzjPOHosKiE0Y9Q1uSU_OHpFKxyXKyRLSKD144UwALkp3ZtgGKY4L-FWc5EQ=w491-h810-v0
In the long moment of silence that followed, the crowd seemed
to sense the apocalyptic solemnity and tenseness of a communication
on which hangs, perhaps, the fate of the entire human race. Not a
sound could be heard anywhere. The children, the crowd, the wind,
all were silent as death. Finally Lucia, as pale as a corpse, ventured
to ask in her high thin voice:
“Do you want nothing more of me?”
“No, today I want nothing more of thee.”
With a last affectionate but overpowering glance, the Lady passed
as usual toward the east—so Lucia concludes the tremendous story
of the third apparition-—-“and disappeared in the immense distance
of the firmament.”
As the children left off gazing eastward and stared, wan and
shaken, at one another, the people began to press around them, all
but suffocating and trampling them in their eagerness to ask all
manner of questions.
“What did she look like?” “What did she say?” “Why do you
look so sad?” “Is it the Blessed Virgin?” “Will she come again?”
“It’s a secret,” said Lucia. “It’s a secret.”
“Good or bad?’’
“Good for some, for others bad.”
“And you won’t tell us?”
“No, sir. It’s a secret and the Lady told us not to tell it.”
Ti Marto picked up