 take Olimpia and the girls occasionally to the
Sunday market at Batalha, to buy new shoes for holiday wear, or
some finery or other. His conversation has always been salted with
the dry wit of those who work outdoors. ‘‘There aren’t any poor
people around here,” he remarked last summer as we watched
1 Francisco was born June 11, 1908; Jacinta, March 11, 1910.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQES-S3E06lcSk7h3S1CTIDf0QPQUnGGzx2nQzheqCfTC3klI7wFHRZO1LYpd-8_dlLmthXrxe9cUJ86AcpIOisUCYk_c87iRNg371DsB58wpE0AyMqRfbMzFF0OYAyOdJjMhpllDw=w491-h810-v0
f3 Our Lady of Fatima
women go by barefoot with great jugs of water on their heads.
“Everybody in these mountains has shoes. Of course, if anybody
wants to give them anything, they’ll take it. But they have enough.”
It was inevitable that a man of his natural dignity should be
something of a personage throughout the Serra da Aire. I saw him
rise to greet the distinguished Archbishop of Evora with great respect
but no servility; and they spoke together like those who know that
as men they are equals. Nor was there ever any doubt as to who was
master in the Marto home. “People always said there was peace in
this house,” he remarked, “and so there was, because I saw to it.
All I had to do was speak, and my boys would keep quitt. They
knew that if they didn’t they’d get a lambasting.2 But that wasn’t
necessary. Just because a burro gives a kick, you don’t have to cut
his leg off right away.”
Francisco was very much like his father. He was a handsome child
with fine steady eyes and regular features, and was generally
amiable, considerate and obedient. Yet his father is proud of the
fact that he had the animal spirits of a normal boy, and now and
then had to be taken in hand, as on a certain evening when he
decided not to say his prayers. He was never afraid of anything,
either. He would go out boldly on the darkest or foggiest night,
when others of his age would shrink from the vast unknown of the
Serra. Or he would catch wild rabbits or foxes, and make pets of
them. He liked to pick up snakes and lizards on the end of his stick,
and thrust them in a pool of water to make them drink, or watch
them wiggle away. “What a man he would have been!” Ti Marto
says from time to time, with a sigh. And Olimpia, with shining
eyes, agrees.
Jacinta, two years younger than her brother, had the same fine
and even features; but the straight line of her brows, close above her
clear and well spaced eyes, suggested a better intelligence. She was
as quick and blithe as a bird, always running or jumping or dancing.
2 "Lampadadasis the Portuguese equivalent. This is one of Marto’s reminiscences
recorded in the excellent book by Father De Marchi, p. 34.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHqXpoNteeEwKxSHUqyQ9xJ7iFbJx0m3uGcaDoPAOaF_TFlLxHV0Rg3zfW-sNb5mePm4QtqJUqoceekBcpLQRN3hmP6WhyXtIm2NK-Ww2_2WJq2P1am1wehp0vC6rmnl6wKUay4=w491-h810-v0
14 Our Lady of Fatima
Perhaps it was because she had affectionate parents that she gave the
impression of being made up wholly of affection—so long as she got
what she wanted. For Jacinta had been spoiled a little, too, as the
baby of a large family, and she could pout or sulk on slight
provocation. This was one reason why Lucia found her annoying
when she first began to play with her in 1914. Still, Jacinta was only
four! Her father still remembers that she could be very stubborn
and independent at times. For some reason she made up her mind
to say, “Hail Mary, full of graces,” instead of “full of grace,” and
no one, he told me with some pride, could ever induce her to use
the correct singular.
The Martos now live just across the road from their former
habitation, between the Abobora house and Fatima. It is a humble
residence, like some of those in Nazareth or Betham .ang ago,
but Senhora Olimpia was as composed and gracious as any lady in
the land as she went about barefoot in her sombre everyday attire
of black and gray, to show it to me. There was little furniture in
the living room except an old-fashoned clock, no longer functioning,
and a massive unpainted wooden chest; nor is there any window
there or in one of the two bedrooms. The kitchen is lighted by a
small overhead pane of glass, perhaps six by eighteen inches. From
the hearth, where a good fire burns in winter, came a feeble glow
from a handful of twigs, for the day was very hot. An antique
kettle stood by some earthen jugs for water, oil and wine. A rosary
hung from a nail in the wall.
Outside was a patio, sheltered by a stone wall and carpeted thick
with twigs from a couple of fig trees growing beside a fence. The
smell of sheep and goats, mingling with the pleasanter aromas from
trees and flowers and the ever-pungent something of the soil,
brings fleas and gnats to this inclosure on a summer afternoon. But
Olimpia smiles with pride as she displays at one end of it the old
outdoor brick oven in which she bakes great loaves of bread once a
week. It used to be twice a week when the children were growing
up. “Yes, I am a strong woman!” she repeats, closing her mouth
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFdAteE0Scm-jgemkonL6eR6DraYq3IsRMynR8SS5OaL6I9KpvdVF5q9jk1XPMIr4uCl-z0JNK6cksorPfCDBlTqMl4wWX2CpPPT7OhpdqoK6WcVdtegJjeYFYBuGOBI4N9gRYvRg=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 15
resolutely, and looking out across the fence at a striking panorama
of fields and pastures between two ranges of mountains. On a
high hill opposite were some antique windmills like those that
Don Quixote tilted with in Spain; and the quadruple wings slowly
revolved and glistened in the fierce July sunshine.
The games that Lucia and her two youngest cousins used to play
in or about the two cottages were those that children play
everywhere: tag, forfeits, cops and robbers, “Button, button,
who’s got the button?” and another called, “Pass the ring.” When
they were tired of such amusements, Lucia would tell them stories,
usually the ones she had heard from her parents and elder sisters
around the hearth after supper on winter nights: hair-raising tales of
witches, fairies and goblins, giants and enchanted princesses, such
as Antonio "and his older daughters liked to relate, and the holier
ones from the more serious lips of Maria Rosa.
What interested Jacinta most was the story of the Passion of
Christ, which Lucia, with the native talent that shows sporadically
in her four memoirs, must have made graphic enough. Jesus
praying alone in the Garden while His friends slept and His
enemies plotted; Jesus being scourged while His Mother looked on,
weeping; Jesus staggering under His heavy cross and falling on
bloody knees under the weight of it; Jesus dying in thirst and agony,
and for our sins, not His—all this made a profound impression on
the generous hearts of both the Marto children, but especially on
that of the little girl. “Poor little Lord!” she would say. “Poor,
poor Our Lord! I am never going to commit another sin, if it
makes You suffer so much!”
One day, when the children were playing in the Santos house,
Lucia’s brother Manuel, who was writing a letter at a table, looked
up suddenly and said, jokingly:
“Come, Jacinta, give me a hug and a kiss!”
“Ask me for something else,” said the little girl.
“No, that’s all I want—three kisses,” he teased.
“The only one I will kiss is Our Lord. I’ll give Lfirn all the
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQER7z8bPUim53QQtsvhrYINTx_8r-PXwa4esV_9UoBHDNTiIcNsChzEy6OmggV8wWuV9KYGl086OiPuhIZdaDroVjZjY16RaezWUZ3CDtzHP3xu294ZjXCUrZGD2XbmEHTqmF7xaA=w491-h810-v0
kisses He wants.” And running to a crucifix that hung on a wall,
she covered it with kisses.
This crucifix never ceased to attract her. One day she took it
from the wall and was looking at it affectionately when Maria came
in and, thinking that Lucia was to blame, began to scold. Didn’t
she know that holy things were not to play with?
“Maria, don’t spank her!” pleaded Jacinta. “It was all my fault.
I won’t do it again.”
Maria gave the rascal a hug, and packed them all out-of-doors, to
play in the sunshine. They ran through the patio, and down the
sloping field behind the house to the threshing floor. This was a
square place paved with concrete on which, for too many years to
remember, the Aboboras have shucked the wild bush beans that
grow all about the meadows, and have threshed their wheat with
flails such as have been used in that country for centuries. There is
a good fragrance there, especially when someone has trampled a
bit of the wild mint that grows among the beans and the brown
grass. The view, too, is excellent. All down the valley, on the
dusty green of the olive trees, there is a shimmer of silver, save on
the darker verdure of pines, figs or holm oaks, or an occasional field
of maize or cabbage.
A few yards from the threshing floor is an old and precious well,
one of the few sources of water in that part of the Serra. It is covered
by several heavy slabs of stone, very convenient to sit on; and there,
hour after hour, in the shade of three olive trees, the children would
he and talk, or simply gaze at the stubble fields where the reddish
soil, scattered with jagged rocks and speckled with purple thistles,
wild red roses, tufts of brown grass, and withering bush beans with
pods standing upright, stretched out into a valley where nothing
ever looked quite the same twice. It was especially beautiful there in
the early morning or late afternoon. It was heavenly at night when a
cool wind came whistling down under the star-pricked vastitude of
iet- When the olive trees were shedding their buds, Maria Rosa was
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFJSnDcBAlg8HxyYCA-7odydSUaGkbWPLHD8HBePNXTevaclI39PQwYXpnrtM4h3fC0aDlBj3u06YxHYv1lViL5qMUfqgNEhStv4I_1Q_Xl6ZILfr95v3-_RyF9yRtLTZFCY0oGMA=w491-h810-v0
J7 Our Lady of Fatima
stern in her insistence that the children keep away from them, if
they were going to play about the well. For the buds had a way of
getting into the hair, the blouse or the long skirt of Lucia or Jacinta,
and then would manage, somehow, to get into the well and spoil
the water. Fdence if any buds were found on Lucia’s clothing at
night, she would get a spanking on general principles—literally,
in Portuguese, a “scraping.” Or next day she would be kept indoors,
and would have the additional pain of hearing Jacinta and Francisco
chirp under a window, asking why she did not come out.
From the well, too, they enjoyed seeing the new sunlight flood
the valley in the morning, and the huge shadows creep from the
mountains at dusk, after the sun had disappeared in a splendor of
crimson and gold and purple. Jacinta was especially fond of
watching sunsets. But she liked even better, after supper, to see the
stars come out, and to count them until they became too numerous.
What fun to look up at them through the branches of one of the fig
trees near the well, and how much larger and more brilliant they
seemed there! Lucia called them the lamps of the angels. The moon
was the lamp of Our Lady. And the sun? Obviously the lamp of
Our Lord.
“I like the lamp of Our Lord best,” Francisco would say.
“I don’t,” returned Jacinta. “It burns and blinds people. I like
the lamp of Our Lady.”
This dispute seemed destined to go on forever. But in the summer
of 1914 it had to yield to one of those catalyses that sometimes
occur in families, as if some invisible poison had turned their
happiness to discontent and their peace to anxiety and dissension.
The agent at work in the Abobora family was not invisible, to be
sure; it was the wine that Antonio drank more and more of with
various cronies in those dark little roadside taverns that mysteriously
survive, in Portugal, even where habitations are few. The poor man
was drinking up not only his fields and his cattle, his self-respect and
his old age, but also the health and good-humor of his wife and
children. Things had come to such a pass that Maria Rosa had to
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHk3ecQRsR9x6EG71p96CXcbw4lN76YEuflvVoQ1dEGkaDTVWotRFbvKFqeYipxvygDWYtq2TJPMUrOoK1HlsoSWiMOz2_TBPRyGFGj-AmjGekhgPHTfnhOAtshr2xijWeV8pqe=w491-h810-v0
18 Our Lady of Fatima
hire herself out as a domestic nurse, sometimes for all night,
sometimes for days at a stretch. She was especially in demand when
a baby was born,- and sometimes, being very charitable, she would
bring home three or four little children to care for while their mother
was ill. It fell to the older girls, then, to look after the house and to
help Manuel in the fields. Caroline’s job had been to pasture the
small flock of sheep and goats on family lots in various parts of the
Serra. But now she was thirteen, and Maria Rosa decided that she
ought to be able to earn some money sewing and weaving. There
was no reason why Lucia could not take over the flock. She was
seven years old, and a big girl for her age.
All the rest (except Lucia) dissented vigorously. Antonio
felt that it would be a disgrace to have so young a child working,
and his older daughters agreed. But Maria Rosa, with her stronger
will, prevailed as usual.
Lucia was enchanted. It made her feel so grown up to think of
being a shepherdess. Francisco and Jacinta, on the other hand, were
heartbroken. Now they would have no one to play with, no one to
tell them stories. In vain they begged their mother to let them go
along, with the sheep of the Martos. At six and four, said Olimpia,
they were much too young. So Lucia, after some preliminary
instruction from Caroline and the rest, went forth alone one
morning, with a long staff to prod the dozen or more sheep and one
or two goats that belonged to her father, and slowly made her way
down the winding road toward the open fields in the valley.
It was not so very difficult, once she got into the meadows, for
there she found plenty of other children who were glad to have her
companionship and to initiate her into the pastoral mysteries. There
are no lush green meadows in this part of Portugal, and nothing
approaching the richness of the Irish fields, where the sheep are
twice as large. Still, the Portuguese flocks manage to keep alive and
to produce good wool by straying over a considerable area every day,
nibbling the sparse grass even when it turns brown in midsummer;
and when they find a place they like, they all crowd together and
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGexoPOSdCJiHOlcuEuGhNmmOCSRCHhk27hoiNyzC6sVXLXmKt36FB9ks6qbFpAHjANxPTZmV0DNDr1DiWjLLbipJbfumoqHxYzAoOcc4wH7HvB18CWUkFpFzvdABOGyQOphD-T=w491-h810-v0
J9 Our Lady of Fatima
remain for some time munching in peace. This gives the shepherds
ample time for games and conversation. Lucia was welcomed on this
first day by three girls from a neighboring village, whom she knew
slightly: Tereza Matias and her sister Maria Rosa, and one Maria
Justino. Their combined flocks were so numerous that they seemed
to spread over the Serra, Lucia remembers, “like a cloud.”
It was a great deal of fun, if one had good company, to spend the
whole day wandering about the wild and beautiful countryside.
Usually the young shepherdess would guide her flock between the
stone walls of a long winding road to where it crossed the highway
from Ourem to Leiria. By the roadside lay the shallow and sluggish
waters of what was called the Lagoa, though the children preferred
to name it the barreiro, or mud-hole. It was not quite as bad as that,
for not only did peasants come from miles around to water their
sheep, burros and oxen, but the women from several hamlets would
bring their laundry there, and almost any day three or four of them
could be seen standing up to their knees in the still water, their
skirts tied up about their waists, scrubbing on a flat rock or board,
while their small children ran naked on the muddy shore or splashed
at the shallow edge of the pond. It was here usually that Lucia
would meet the other girls. After their flocks had^ad a good drink,
they would herd them all together, and drive them to the pasture
where they wished to spend the day.
A favorite place was on some land that Lucia’s father owned,
about a mile west of the Lagoa, and more than twice as far from
Aljustrel, in a great hollow or bowl, whose name, the Cova da Iria,
suggests that there perhaps a girl saint’s prayers may have won her
the courage to protect her virtue even at the cost of life. At all events,
there was something about the place that always had a strong appeal
for Lucia and her friends. Under the vault of ineffable blue
(especially over the northern slope) there was a various undulating
scene. The grayish green of innumerable olive trees was broken by
the darker tinge and thicker foliage of many evergreens, par¬
ticularly of the holm oak family. The branches of the carrasqueira
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEY-7fS-za9UwSouvJaqHYwps_lj0YKmHD-mK9rJjJ0zI1OCbgDGSaiw637NEmYQH3a2VKvL685XMHSemWsdQioxIL373DuBMd-an-CqJ9ynut2top6isujFax0l7bNyqDi93YiEQ=w491-h810-v0
20 Our Lady of Fatima
spread widely and gave a fine shade. The azinheira was a dwarfed
variety, three to six feet high. In some places the grass grew long
enough to be cut as hay. Much of the soil is reddish clay, and
seems fit to produce only small wild flowers and thistles; but its
barren look is deceptive, for when turned over it packs down and
holds moisture even during a long arid summer, and bears diminu¬
tive but good potatoes, besides cabbages and corn. Lucia’s father
owned several cultivated patches in the Cova da Ina.
Sometimes they would spend all day there. Or they would go,
after lunch, to a wild place to the south called Valinhos. The
ground there was cut up into numerous fields of irregular shape,
surrounded by thick stone walls four to six feet high, and so
strewn with rocks, far and wide, that the wonder is that it ever
occurred to anybody to fence it off for pastureland. Yet there is
much good grass among the jagged rocks, and as there are