OUR LADY OF fAtIMA
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFnObYXLEWGTpB9byZeEMdYmQUYg9YKbPZq14MX4ukiVGTafmDXRyCrSHcKyjKezMW6AxHYXmMrF25HtwPSW-_46KEjUmmTMQV0CwmyEYFSduSuL33j5XQTQ_NBNColvt07ljddww=w491-h810-v0
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY KIW YORK • BOSTON • CHICAGO • DALLAS
ATLANTA • SAN FRANCISCO
MACMILLAN AND CO., Limited
LONDON . BOMBAY • CALCUTTA • HABEAS MELBOURNE
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY OF CANADA, Limited
TORONTO
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGoNGCozLIVvkpCdSVdLrwmNImY_QHN5BtrpBvqWVujEThzRMuthqwm7ez2rvojMh3y3UEs_RjCiqgTv3nND8CLjxOYfg9t2iNjZdugYV0UoCOZ2XQZspxnNk9UZen0EskaHsvk=w491-h810-v0
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE6Xxud2Mp1Ql4zVI7TvNrk9SO69eMkKTTLdgVes4-LwvpRW6kHLlUKtxQOEgcIN3K8z5UibumDhD4PyMz2ap_MEWFYQXEvLW1PXoE7kRwMDoFtytfklmLcoTUwK_0lcl0jjRpa_g=w491-h810-v0
OUR LADY OF FATIMA
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHpQWDM6gZe8jFs2XoYmYVpMx-L1ak0kPFRx-27bkHYfkch00VWfZE74pChho1IrlJaeuREnNQXxccrVF8HMdjtzhyhcN37baTpqGA8nXwm34IKlIojjM_Xv9FB6xZsUxD3ErUOMA=w491-h810-v0
OUR LADY OF FATIMA
By
WILLIAM THOMAS WALSH
THE CATHOLIC BOOK CLUB EDITION
New York
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
*947
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEBakmaxF7-Gq4x2tsSkUu9K4L-7VhJSFs8xPG7-nK4sgdQNSL2hMk9E1zO5JIV6Xl9RMi293dT1Pce8LIMK50H6eBr-FM2p-lvZ216sUsNMU6k4cYQOtGMF7-oxa9IWzj9yWfB5Q=w491-h810-v0
Copyright, 1947, by WILLIAM THOMAS, WALSH.
All rights reserved—no part of this . book
may be reproduced in any form without
permission in writing from the publisher,
except by a reviewer who wishes to quote brief
passages in connection with a review written
for inclusion in magazine or newspaper.
First Printing.
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHFS2jTHSip0DbbsAGlrRKyWjnnVP7p65TzLUJ4VHlZ-6O_WSbZQdWWHe1jAOqf3CDqDfsRMEsmIG1fBs8hBk-2Q47rPptfm7lozT6JWpJqcZeRLU66Ap9Gnydo0e4t2fnWhvog1A=w491-h810-v0
PREFACE
One of the strangest and most beautiful stories I have ever
heard was enacted from 1516 to 1920 in the hill country called
the Serra da Aire, in the geographical center of Portugal. Three
shepherd children, the oldest ten, the youngest seven, reported
six times in 1917 that they had seen a Lady made wholly of light,
who stood on a small tree, spoke to them, and vanished. On the
last occasion, in the presence of 70,000 people, she performed a
startling miracle to prove the truth of what the children said. Two
of the little shepherds died in childhood, as she had foretold.
Time has verified her other prophecies thus far: the Bolshevik
Revolution, which began soon after; the horrors of World War II;
the menace that Marxism offers to the entire world at this moment.
The Lady said that if her wishes were obeyed, she would convert
Russia and there would be peace. If not, every country in the
world would be scourged and enslaved.
The third shepherd is still living. She is Sister Maria das Dores
(Mary of the Sorrows), a lay sister of the Institute of Saint
Dorothy, just forty years of age. I had a long conversation with
her last summer. This book is based principally upon her four
written but unpublished memoirs, in the light of that conversation.
The message she has lived to reveal is that of no ordinary Lady.
It comes, I am convinced, from the Queen of heaven and earth,
whose beauty, power and goodness have been the theme of
prophets and saints for thousands of years. She is that maiden of
whom Isaias wrote, “A virgin shall conceive and bear a son ...”
the one of whom King Solomon asked, “Who is she that cometh
forth as the morning rising, fair as the moon, bright as the sun,
terrible as an army set in array?” It was to her that the angel
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHO4OsaoPTSwGT39B6ipuqTEREgSufdnZpToly0EoupP1miL6QIunjmsZJVCczNttOp_-EVz9QpKSdfzjcRxjWjFDn2iqMI30uqXeaGKEgWINhJ7qeg74uXD-pRSMwwHgeEbIZQXA=w491-h810-v0
Gabriel said, “Hail, full of grace! The Lord is with thee. Blessed
art thou among women!” and she replied “Henceforth all genera¬
tions shall call me blessed.”
This Lady has often changed the course of history. Her Rosary,
preached by Saint Dominic, overthrew the Manichean heresy
that would have destroyed European society. It kept both faith
and the love of freedom alive in Eire for centuries. It won the
battle of Lepanto, where Christendom was saved from Moslem
domination. It was under her special protection that Columbus
set out to discover our western world, changing the name of his
flagship from Mariagalante to Santa Maria; and every night, as
dusk came over the uncharted and terrifying waste of the Sargasso
Sea, his sailors would assemble on the decks to sing her vesper
hymn:
“Hail, holy Queen, mother of mercy,
Our life, our sweetness and our hope,
Hail! . . .”
American Catholics followed this tradition in placing their country
under the protection of her Immaculate Conception. And let no
one imagine that any sort of Brave New World will be able to
efface her memory! For at the end of time, before the consumma¬
tion of this world, there will appear in heaven—or has it already
appeared?—the sign foretold by Saint John in his Apocalypse:
“A woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet,
and on her head a crown of twelve stars.”
No one who believes in God and the immortality of the soul
should find it incredible that the Mother of Christ, the incarnate
God, should have revealed herself to privileged persons at various
crises in human affairs. Several of these appearances have been
established beyond any reasonable doubt—notably, in modern
times, the apparitions to Saint Bernadette at Lourdes. But why
should she have appeared in Portugal in 1917, and in such a de¬
serted and inaccessible place as the Serra da Aire? It takes all day
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHLLHoY3kdQjfW_psmBeYekGL7vWKCQa_3x9nMXfqhmTP-ph2fIERt2m1FB7l5UZW65Jx1BzJHUI6uLIW82i9e0U2ucMMwotqAMsbCzdeYVhthf-zNCdeLMB4XYe1bF02ATPW8H=w491-h810-v0
to get to Fatima, some ninety miles north of Lisboa, first by train
and then by bus or taxi; and when one arrives, there is not much
to see but a vast moor with sparse vegetation for lean sheep to
nibble, and a few wretched villages (by American standards)
where humble peasants scrape a bare existence out of a dry reddish
soil.
Well, first of all she appears where it pleases God, and her.
But the Portuguese have an idea that they were favored partly,
at least, because their country has always been called a terra de
Santa Maria; and in the Serra about Fatima, regardless of revolu¬
tions and apostacies in other places, the poor have clung for cen¬
turies with unwavering devotion to the recitation of her Rosary.
Cova da Ina, the wild place where the apparitions occurred, some
two miles west of Fatima, was named from the girl martyr Saint
Iria or Irene, who probably had a hermitage there. And eight miles
west of Cova da Ina is a tiny antique chapel, square and ugly,
where King Joao I promised Our Lady that if she gave him vic¬
tory over the Spanish invaders in 1385, he would raise a more
fitting temple in her honor. He kept his promise by building,
across the road, one of the most beautiful Gothic churches in the
world, the incredibly graceful and majestic abbey of Batalha.
The Constable of Portugal, who commanded the army under
King Joao, was Nuno Alvares Pereira, a hero of twenty-five who
wielded a sw’ord engraved with the name “Maria.” He built six
churches in honor of Our Lady, one of the loveliest of them the
Carmelite monastery and chapel at Lisboa. It was there, after
forty years in the king’s service, that he retired to lay his sword
at the feet of her image, and to take the habit of her order, with the
name Nuno de Santa Maria. Nearly five hundred years later he
was beatified by Pope Benedict XV. His sword “Maria” may
still be seen at the Carmo at Lisboa, in the hand of a statue of the
Prophet Elias.
It was among the mountains hallowed by so many memories
and traditions of her that the Lady appeared. And when such
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE_F5vKfFGXssZE3Edye0H7WaBlnczbQpVKI0tPhfmeKjZJBKYrvA7rYzh-Oj3ulQCFATDVC_ViBlMObhZQZKiKDrTNLY1XuTHTJ1-pKELqAhpfjaVhU4qFbxGDRhPfzGg7ejReDw=w491-h810-v0
a Lady appears anywhere, to give mankind a request and a warning,
it is no small matter. My interest in the subject was aroused
by what I heard of it from the Reverend Father John C. Rubba,
O. P., and the Reverend Father William A. Hinnebusch, O. P.
of Providence College. Some of the published accounts,
however, were so conflicting that I decided to go to Portugal and
try to verify the details before attempting a book. Thanks mainly
to their good offices, and to the prayers of several communities of
Dominican and Discalced Carmelite contemplatives, I was able
to do so under the most favorable conditions. His Excellency, the
Most Reverend Jose Alvernaz, Bishop of Cochin, India, and His
Eminence, the Most Reverend Francis Cardinal Spellman of New
York were good enough to commend my trip to authorities in
Portugal, and I was given every facility for investigation by His
Eminence, the Most Reverend Manuel Cardinal Cerejeira, Patri¬
arch of Lisboa, and His Excellency, the Most Reverend Dom
Jose Alves Correia da Silva, Bishop of Leiria, in whose diocese
Fatima and Cova da Ina lie. I flew to Lisboa, attended the pil¬
grimage and processions of July 12—13, 1946, and lived for some
time at Cova de Iria and nearby places, interviewing the parents
and relatives of the two dead children, besides other witnesses of
the miracle of October 1917.
I am indebted to the works and spoken advice of the Reverend
Father Jose Galamba de Oliveira, author of Jacinta: episodios
ineditos das a pari foes de Nossa Senhora; the Reverend Father Luis
Gonzaga Aires da Fonseca, S. J., professor at the Pontifical Biblical
Institute at Rome and author of Le Meraviglie di Fatima, and the
Reverend Father Joao de Marchi, I. M. C., author of Era uma
senhora mais brilhante que o sol. This fast is particularly valuable
because Father De Marchi has spent three years at Fatima
interrogating the chief surviving witnesses, and setting down their
exact words with scholarly patience and accuracy. I have taken some
of the particulars about Sister Dores’ early convent life from Senhor
Antero de Figueiredo’s Fatima: Graf as, Segredos, Misterios.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHGY9S5N3jmIVeOq2mo_if8gEs63rtaGFMRjAOFVBkxhST5w0resh4K_S9MFQPp7Puhl3tUjUJtxAvZjc8F9ih_v1hIY8yZwZ6ydIntO6gzdHBxjYjS2VNYvD8gngg-wi8eNkShUQ=w491-h810-v0
I can never sufficiently thank the Reverend Father Manuel
Rocha, who was asked to help me by His Eminence, the Cardinal
Patriarch, and whose patience and courtesy were inexhaustible;
and my good fellow-pilgrims from America, the Reverend Father
Leal Furtado and Mr. Daniel F. Sullivan. Finally, the assistance
of my daughter Helen has been indispensable.
The book is not “fictionized.” I owe the conversations chiefly to
the precise memory of Sister Dores.
The interest of the story in itself—and it would be a great one
even if it had been invented, instead of happening—is negligible
compared to the truth that it was intended by its divine Author to
convey. I came home from Portugal convinced that nothing is so
important as making known what the Mother of God asked in
those apparitions of 1917, which for some reason have been so
neglected, so distorted, so misunderstood. The future of our civili¬
zation, our liberties, our very existence may depend upon the
acceptance of her commands.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFknuu4CivT48rWdbrUA62jb_LaI4z85XnO_xHU5s6f5O9rt3XAppyW-fECD9dIdyYUE8vwBOlmnsu_3cKfSey416WJmaBrn6colpS5VNyv2cqpCK3FHhF0H4_01lJFCufFkvmu=w491-h810-v0
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG2Ju9Kvivu7K9boweROwEPbShoviR-NstEH_WIxSEtiqQIWuMRTOuL1LLiGi0W2bpNXzHgaiG9O_mKCnDoKBo62QGMgd6ntpeMwyo_8CSXQE_tb7qh05xiiI4KL9HOsf8IE5t1dw=w491-h810-v0
X ■
OUR LADY OF FATIMA
\
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGs1nFMrh6nYYau0MqzHoCnx3NXG3f0XEGdGPpsYpKOXdtnGGOPIIgqdhZCRNjkogee-OdW7lAi6Mp4kJxBAyn2eNqKcmwNNf4BQo2N6cRbOsXHJu7UlobrsoOS_72I_zN_PnmDOw=w491-h810-v0
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE3gHA6Xw8hIyodoy6ApI1ayDlyeBpOlqNyQl6EeAZXTY_ascZJOxaDldx1ZqyRupEoOgZMkzXwRzA39II1KajeP4gzLLakqX4fcS60lb0-TgrmoixruYlI9OpRR-S0jJeQCJhdEA=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER I
Half a mile south of Fatima, on both sides of a winding road
paved with flattish cobblestones and scarcely wide enough for two
ox-teams to pass, lies the village of Aljustrel. The houses, sheds
and patios all join a high stone wall that runs along each side of
that narrow “street,” and seem to be strung on it like beads of
odd shapes and sizes. Windows are few and small, for the north¬
west blast of winter, cutping across the mountains from the Atlantic,
is as pitiless as the parching sunlight of summer; hence these squat
one-story dwellings with their red tile roofs and whitewashed stone
walls have a veiled and wary look, as if each one could tell an
enormous secret if it chose.
If it is a week-day, the men are in the fields; but in and out
of the dark interiors pass short, rather handsome women and
children with fine eyes, gleaming teeth, and—this from carrying
heavy burdens on their heads—straight postures and graceful
movements, even under the weight of three or four gallons of
water in an earthen jug. Their bare feet, dusty but shapely, seem
not to feel the sharp stones, nor are their laughing faces annoyed
by the flies, fleas and other insects that buzz, in hot weather, over
the patios and the sheds where animals are kept. A burro brays,
a dog barks, a rooster crows, a yoke of oxen lumber heavily along
the road. The air is seasoned with many odors, among which can
be distinguished those of pines and evergreen shrubs, wild mint
and onions, sheep, goats and chickens; above all, the distinctive
musty and acrid though not exactly disagreeable smell that the
soil of Portugal seems to have everywhere. There is nothing here
of the overpowering fishiness of Lisboa or Porto, but the red fields
are just as insistent in their own way, and the clothes of all these
people are laden with the aroma. Such is Aljustrel, where Lucia
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFCoU5bK_mNsjBxPAct7TSn5hBINQOfuwF3n3J3VmVsDw5AasFL5YVHnKgztmLNZ9-M-3JhB1wbx3KepX_iu8fTZ5e3IlXLk1QvwnYKoittwwiWmFfO1RHgLa9JbPvtfz2yJs2FiQ=w491-h810-v0
Abobora, now the famous Sister Maria of the Sorrows, was born
on March 22, 1907.
The cottage in which she grew up was very much like the one
where visitors now find that patient and courteous woman with
dark honest eyes who is her oldest sister, Maria of the Angels. ,
The living room is severely furnished with a table, a chair, a
couple of old wooden chests where food and clothing are stored,
a few pious pictures on the bare wall. A breach in the tiled roof,
just over a hole in the wooden ceiling, lets in a splash of sunlight,
by which one sees better, in a small adjoining room, the old hand
loom that used to belong to Lucia’s mother. A half-finished rug
of white, red and blue woolen stuff still lies entangled in the
cords, and sends up a cloud of dust at the slightest touch. The
dark kitchen has a spacious fireplace in which a few twigs are
feebly burning, even in summer; at other seasons it is lighted by
several candles on a piece of board hanging from a wooden ceiling
black from the smoke of many winters. There is but one bedroom.
An iron bed, with coverings bright and neat, fills half of it, touch¬
ing three of the undecorated walls. A potted plant stands on the
sill of the tiny window; another, with pink flowers, is on the
floor. Maria of the Angels explains that the bed was formerly in
the house of her parents, and that her sister Lucia was born in it.
Lucia was the youngest, as Maria was the oldest, of the seven
children of Antonio Abobora (or dos Santos), a small farmer and
sheep grower who owned pieces of land in various parts of the
Serra da Aire. He was a rather good-looking man with dark pas¬
sionate eyes, who liked conviviality better than going to Mass,
and wine more than work. His wife, Maria Rosa, was a devout,
almost severe Catholic, short, stout and muscular, with a heavy
mannish face which had a grave benignity, but on rare occasions
could relax in a motherly smile. There was no nonsense about
Maria Rosa, however. She never had time for it.
It was this strong parent who came into Lucia’s mind when,
in writing her memoirs, she began to examine her earliest recollec-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFMS43OKHwnFfqFTv6L1HsYc0WmUzH2PA_--JvdqyC04cqiOBwxR0x2QW3vfUcgk-s2qETc0bqoGwYGCzmDSwPpDbvoZ_KZWat5jiF_3qF7nh3pM0eykc6OgXt7LPosytruuDxNUQ=w491-h810-v0
tions. She could remember squirming in those stalwart arms, and
being conscious even then of her own personality and her own
actions. One of the first things she recalled was learning the “Ave
Maria” from her mother’s lips. “Hail, full of Grace! The Lord is
with thee! Blessed art thou among women!” The ancient prayer,
commencing with those words of an angel, is beautiful in any
language. But in Portuguese the syllables seem to have acquired
a rhythm peculiarly intense and memorable:
“Ave, Maria, cheia de gra$a, O Senhor e convosco! Bemdita
sois vos entre as mulheres, e bemdito e o fruto do vosso ventre, Jesus!
“Santa Maria, Mai de Deus, rogai por nos pecadores, agora e na
hora da nossa morte. Amen.”
Lucia has other memories of a more worldly sort. There were,
for instance, not a few furious battles in which one or another
of her four older sisters always bore off the victory, and left her
howling on the floor until her mother snatched her up and caressed
her. Lucia could hardly remember the time when she was not
under the spell of that passion for dancing to which peasants are
given even more than other human beings. This was especially
true of her two grown-up sisters, Maria of the Angels and Teresa.
And there were plenty of opportunities at Aljustrel. There was
sure to be a party somewhere on every holy day—the feast of the
Sacred Heart and Saint Anthony’s in June, that of Our Lady of
the Rosary in October, and of course, Christmas and Easter. Be¬
sides this, Maria Rosa was in great demand, either as a patron or
as a cook of renowned skill, whenever there was a wedding in any
of the dozen hamlets scattered about the Serra; and her older
daughters seldom failed to accompany her.
The problem of how to dispose of the baby on such occasions
was easily solved. Although she was hardly able to walk, much
less dance, Lucia was arrayed in an embroidered skirt with a shiny
belt, a splendid kerchief whose corners hung down in back and,
what pleased her most, a jaunty little hat glittering with gold
beads and bright feathers. She was then carried in the stout ma-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFXUGLoPvU2sxRRzTA4q38TVUB4rHX3IDCd-QlZp9bQ2pLxtTCsY-90r5y__RllUv-zBdaUMCPBkjc21OGSysb8vWsG1jc1V1s3nOaEmTUPdD6vmDHszs9ZMXqJ8RdSOiO4Rz13aA=w491-h810-v0
4 Our Lady of Fatima
ternal arms through the labyrinth of narrow roads that zigzag
across the irregular rocky fields between high stone walls; and when
the dancing began after supper, she was firmly deposited, for
safety from trampling feet, on one of those high wooden chests
that form a chief part of the furniture of every kitchen and living
room. From that eminence the tiny girl could watch the flushed
faces and the twinkling feet, and listen to the fascinating sounds
that came from a guitar or a harmonica. Sooner or later, no doubt,
she would fall asleep and remain rolled up against the wall until
it was time to go home-—more often than not when the first streaks
of dawn were mounting the eastern sky. For Lucia’s sisters could
never have enough of waltzes, which were all the rage at that
time.
At the Abobora residence, too, there were plenty of parties. In
summer the young people gathered under a large fig tree in the
patio, in winter in a shed adjoining the house. On such occasions
Maria Rosa would sit at the door of the little room opening on
the patio, where she could see all that might be going on inside
or outside. Sometimes she had