 legs about in time to music. Lucia liked it well enough, but
not with the tireless inebriation that seemed to possess the younger
-1— 1 “He who will pass the alecrim
And does not stop to pluck a sprig.
Will not be mindful of his love.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFGc4PWZOjSYj6P_9qY5Gz-6YnBcN-8V2uU9SGQJxj2qEiQh7GZofHuNjwc6X5BMw8MbcHm2B0RCc5KwNnL2jy75jxmR93g9TfhEx6YAUujrCkAI5axjJub9mDTbRdZ_6jlI-LqPQ=w491-h810-v0
3°
girl. As for Francisco, he cared nothing for it. Yet, because he
loved music, and because he enjoyed seeing the girls dance, he
would sit for hours on a stone playing one tune after another on
his pipe, while they tripped barefoot on the parched clay or the
trampled grass. Some of the profaner songs may have been sung
in those mountains since Roman times. Others were holy, for the
Portuguese shepherds, like those of France, have quite a repertory
of Catholic songs inherited from the Middle Ages. Francisco’s
favorite was one called Amo a Deus no Ceu, which went thus:
“I love God in heaven,
I love Fdim on earth,
I love the field, the flowers,
I love the mountain sheep.
Like my little lambs,
I learn to jump.
I am the joy of the serra,
I am the lily of the valley.
I am a poor shepherd girl,
I pray to Mary always.
In the middle of my flock
I am the midday sun.
O’ i 6 ai!
Who will let me see Thee?
O’ i 6 ai!
My Jesus, now, this moment?” 2
One of. Jacinta’s favorites was an old hymn:
“Hail, noble Patron,
Thy people’s favorite,
Chosen among all,
As the people of the Lord.
2 De Marchi, p. 47. Lucia gives a slightly different version in Memoir IV, pp. 4—5.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEYOUl2jd8GKl5Q0TQVJJbHmQA1pVPzbrVfMcRb0kIIX44pgHmcv8GFV97gfj_su5B6wy892p32RJlTwom_DuzdFsA4PUkYE4eBEkfgXnL-w8YsLs4xGKTELnQY28q0UDBGItKb5A=w491-h810-v0
31
O glory o£ our land
Saved by thee a thousand times,
To all true Portuguese
Thou art their love,
Their love!
O angels, sing with me!
O angels, sing forever.
I can’t give thanks as you can,
Angels, give them for me,
Give them for me!
O Jesus, what tender Jove!
O Jesus, what love is thine?
Leave the heavenly throne,
Come make a heaven on earth,
A heaven on earth!”
There was another one that went,
“In heaven, in heaven, in heaven
I shall be with my Mother . . .
Virgin pure, your tenderness
Is the solace of my pain;
Night and day I shall sing
The beauty of Mary!”
There was nothing of self-conscious piety in the impulse of
these children to sing songs about Christ and Our Lady, heaven
and the angels. Christianity for them was not like a garment to
be put on on Sundays. It was like the air they breathed, it v/as a
part, and the most important part, of reality. And because they
knew that all things v/ere the creatures of God, they turned just
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH2-msJ35cAOYyeSixyB6LUJsUwwiQ_N_xaFRqa2n_nY9Si1E_pMvz34LdiPYuhkCg0lIThOidX6b3HvPtyMFni2Y8C4SEXBDrMcn3ThHTQjIi44LvJQ3UxMBfHIRuKFLyW2mLwiQ=w491-h810-v0
as naturally from time to time to more secular and even profane
songs “of which unhappily,” wrote Lucia, “we knew plenty.”
There was this rather cryptic one, for instance! /
“Pretty almond tree,
What blossoming have you?
It was on your account
I lost my good name.
I have a bad name now—
Let it go!
I am going to wash
In rose water.
I am going to gild
The green lemon!
Singing is lovely,
Weening is no good.”
There was a rollicking spring song to which it was great fun
to dance:
“Don’t sing the ah la la, o spring, o spring!
The ah la la is all over, how nice, how nice!
Because of the ah la la, o spring, o spring!
My mother punished me, how nice, how nice!
Ah la la . . .
Ah la la . . .
In this life everything sings, o spring, o spring!
As if to challenge me, how nice, how nice!
The spring sings on the serra, o spring, o spring!
And the laundress at the river, how nice, how nice!
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFqpm4WtjvjpPZnlpDgBC0RfAapOBx7uzAMiTYb65LHbn_VdG6T_M-0kG26VUVhQ4EQKpK_7lr-ODiYNgS18vFm-1FbvyVgbiY4miirt3A_WBw-Xe73bdfG02zxRylZ0aAtKmVikQ=w491-h810-v0
33 Our Lady of Fatima
Ah la la . . .
Ah la la . . .
At night the screech-owl sings, o spring, o spring!
He tries to frighten me, how nice, how nice!
The girl as she disrobes, o spring, o spring!
Sings songs to the moon, how nice, how nice!
Ah la la . . .
Ah la la . . .
The nightingale in the Held, o spring, o spring!
Sings all day long, how nice, how nice!
The turtle dove sings in the wood, o spring, o spring!
The squeaking wagon sings, how nice, how nice!
Ah la la . . .
Ah la la . . .
Another fine old song was called A Serrana:
“Mountain girl, mountain girl,
With chestnut eyes,
Who gave you, mountain girl,
Such lovely charms?
Such lovely charms,
I never saw the like!
Have pity on me.
Have pity on me,
Serrana, serrana,
Have pity on me!”
When they tired of singing they would play various games. They
were getting rather big now for “Button, button,” or “Pass the
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHOFg0wUbeHOi-NK0Cdx86iWpTZQQjziUnBuzZX3c8OrLeeOYcveceDNX87OM1srrGvbiY5oEF4sQkk-o-QuJ7Ol7QdUf_YIRZuFqudL-o8TvWnRc_OT1oKT8bXkOgH0RuGFHjtXQ=w491-h810-v0
34 Our Lady of Fatima
ring”; but it was more fun to pitch quoits. As for cards, they
always carried two packs along, one belonging to Lucia’s family,
the other to the Martos. Among the best games with these were
“dressing the queens,” and “sobering up the kings.” There was
another, that Lucia liked, called bisca.
After their merenda, or afternoon snack, they were in the habit
of kneeling wherever they happened to be and saying the Rosary.
Maria Rosa had instructed Lucia to do this; but without her watch¬
ful supervision they were beginning to gloss over parts of it until
they had reduced it to a perfunctory recital, in which the medita¬
tion intended to be part of the devotion had very little share, and
nothing remained of the words but the first two of each prayer:
“Hail, Mary . . . Hail Mary . . . Hail, Mary;” and “Our
Father.” Living in the presence of God in all innocence, and seeing
in everything about them the work of His hands and the evi¬
dence of His goodness and power, these three young shepherds
must have seemed neither better nor worse than most other urchins
of the Serra, and ordinary Catholic children everywhere, when
their bucolic routine was first interrupted, in the summer of 1916,
by a tremendous and unpredictable experience.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFGnwjdlf6n-E08SVg1cFOKpsWC3TjBebsSEVe7HXuozCB7YstniS9lqNtcspHL7Eg43Rku9RHtc8Gw4PutAbysVFH-jvRPo_dZx6ogxmnAAxiG1OUhVh8HSq6YN87DKnyEztUIvg=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER IV
The Serra da Aire had felt very little, thus far, of the misery
and despair that had settled over Europe in the spring of 1516.
In such remote and inaccessible places life generally pursues its
own serene course though armies clash and kingdoms come toppling
down. Ti Marto, for example, had felt a natural shock of indigna¬
tion when King Carlos was assassinated in 1908, and he had
never expected much of the liberal Republic of 1910, for he knew
the anti-Christian principles and associations of its founders. Yet a
true peasant is more interested in the amount of rainfall and the
price of wool than in the identity of his rulers in some city many
miles away. It was said that the Republic had seized church prop¬
erty, exiled hundreds of nuns, priests, and even the Cardinal
Patriarch of Lisboa and other bishops. But the people of Aljustrel
still had their good priest at Fatima, and could hear Mass every
Sunday. It is doubtful if they realized the harm that had been
done to the Church in other parts of the country, particularly
in the cities.
It was very much the same when Portugal formally entered the
World War in March, 1916. Only a few days previously Pope
Benedict XV had made one of his most moving appeals for peace.
He had begged all men of good will to have recourse to prayer
and mortification rather than hatred, and had warned of the ruin
that would come to all Europe if his words were not heeded. Yet
with this memorable utterance still reverberating throughout the
world, the unchristian rulers of that little Christian country—-
Christian at least, in history and tradition, and in country places
like the Serra da Aire—had taken the decisive step, preferring to
follow the voice of England rather than the Pope’s; and Portugal
was now openly at war. Still, outside of the newspaper propa-
35
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHss8I_g-5lJYybfE-KzvrNGiloW1d2WauQCEaceQbr5ydtPjtT1paTogY6FlXOnRAdX0F0IBTr4TAg47aDjF622cRBCNzojHP3q3lITC2-hR_Cj4k2eqi_mSU9iOHZqcy2sJ_u=w491-h810-v0
ganda from near-by cities there was little evidence of the change
in places like Aljustrel. For it was planting time there, and every¬
thing seemed hopeful and cheerful as the sun grew warmer, and
the fields turned from reddish brown to green. Lucia, Francisco
and Jacinta followed their sheep as usual over the savory hills,
watched the rebirth of the world, and sang and danced among
the rocks.
Thus passed the spring, and it was summer again. But nothing
very notable occurred until one fine clear warm day, when they
met according to their custom and guided their flocks slowly toward
a place known as Couza Velha, a little west of Aljustrel. For some
time the sheep nibbled at the new grass on a field there belonging
to Lucia’s father, while the children played various games near by.
They were still amusing themselves, in the middle of the morn¬
ing, when the sky became suddenly overcast, and a fine mist
scudded quickly down on one of those stiff, cold breezes from the
invisible ocean to the northwest. They remembered the half-cave
at Cabe^o, near the rocky crest of the slope on which the sheep
were grazing; and as quickly as possible they prodded them up
the gradual incline until, seeing them huddled peacefully in the
shelter of some trees, they themselves took refuge in the “cave”
on the southern brow of the hill.
It is not much of a cave, to tell the truth, for only a little bit
of it is roofed. Still, there is enough of a pitch in the great rock
that slants upward from the small hollow to give shelter from
any light rain or heavy blow from the north or northwest. At
any rate, it was the best to be found, and the three continued
their games there as gaily as before. After a while they became
hungry and ate their lunch. Then they knelt and recited the
Rosary. Lucia does not remember whether they said all of it, or
merely the skeletonized, “Hail Mary . . . Our Father.” She does
recall, however, that when they had finished, the rain stopped as
suddenly as it had begun, and presently the sun was shining again,
fierce and white, in a serene sky. She and the others began to
throw stones into the valley below.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQElXe3Z_WX4I5KWEIqmH9nPpXdtiYBDwZxiACGtQK1-6XqN_mRgz8RV8ORW9Km_Sd7SqNIy8IMF2wg6o_C1Whnk_9JZoeT_O5q_4aLnDH3O9nUI9ByB13SaWriFP874iD0RJM3I8Q=w491-h810-v0
They had enjoyed this sport only a few moments when, with¬
out warning, a strong wind began to blow across the tops of the
pines, which swayed and moaned as never before. Startled by this,
the three left off casting stones, and looked about to see what
the cause might be. Then they saw a light far over the tops of
the trees. It was moving over the valley from east to west, and
coming in their' direction. And though the illumination itself
was unlike any they had ever seen, Lucia recognized in it the
strange whiteness of that “somebody wrapped in a sheet” that
she had witnessed the previous year with the three other girls. It
seemed indeed to be wholly made up of a radiance more white
than snow; and this time it drew so near that when it was just
over a squarish rock at the entrance of the “cave,” it became dis¬
tinguishable as the form of “a transparent young man” of about
fourteen or fifteen years of age, “more brilliant than a crystal, pene¬
trated by the rays of the sun,” as Lucia describes it—or “like snow
that the sun shines through until it becomes crystalline.” And
now they could see that he had features like those of a human
being, and was indescribably beautiful.
Stupefied, speechless, they stood regarding him.
“Don’t be afraid,” he said. “I am the Angel of Peace. Pray
with me.”
And kneeling on the ground, he prostrated himself until his
forehead touched it, saying:
“My God, I believe, I adore, I hope, and I love You! I beg
pardon of You for those who do not believe, do not adore, do
not hope and do not love You!” 1
1 This is a literal translation of the words as Lucia gives them: "Mcu Deus! Eu
creio, adoro, espero e amo-vos; pego-vos perddo para os que ndo creem ndo adoram
ndo esperam e vos ndo amam."—Memoir II, pp. io-ii. Her two descriptions of the
angel are substantially the same: "Sc aproximava iamos divisando as feigoes, um jovem
dos 140 15 anos, mats branco que se fora de neve, que o Sol tornava transparente como
se fora de cristal e duma grande beleza.”—Memoir II, p. 10, 1937. And, "A alguma
distancia sobre as drvores que se estendian ao direccao no nascente, uma luz mais
branca que a neve, com a forma dum jovem transparente, mais brilhante que um
cristal atravesado pelos raios do Sol. A medida que se aproximava, tamos-lhe dis-
tinguindo as feigoes."—Memoir IV, p. 31, December 8, 1941.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGOWSP6Qq9vbYcDo-xcS7ev22FZxrSFUPcUufl9tQ8D1sNf1498OSD7TP5HvVIoslbw-PwyMVuyONpnvOlrfwxSv5TtuPQJtz0m3hXyvojYBXAuRv-eEhvLIM07zoUUPPkPPZM2Ig=w491-h810-v0
Three times he spoke the same words, while the children, as in
a daze, repeated them after him. Then, arising he said:
“Pray thus. The hearts of Jesus and Mary are attentive to the
voice of your supplications.”
With that he disappeared, as if he had been dissolved in sun¬
light.
The children remained kneeling for a long time under the
influence perhaps of some supernatural state of ecstacy or suspension
of bodily powers, such as many saints have described. “It was so
intense,” wrote Lucia, “that we were almost unaware of our own
existence for a long space of time.” They kept saying the Angel’s
prayer over and over. Not that there was any danger of forgetting
it, for the words had been impressed indelibly upon their minds;
but it seemed the only thing to do.
“My God, I believe, I adore, I hope, and I love You! I beg pardon
of You for those who do not believe, do not adore, do not hope, and
do not love You.”
Lucia and Jacinta were still kneeling and repeating these words,
when they became aware of the voice of Francisco:
“I can’t stay this way as long as you can, it hurts my back so much
I can’t do it.”
He had stopped kneeling and was sitting on the ground,
exhausted. All of them, in fact, felt weak and dazed. Gradually
they pulled themselves together and then began to collect the
scattered sheep, for the day was far spent and it was nearly time for
supper. None of them felt like talking on the way to Aljustrel.
Just before they parted, Lucia warned the others to say nothing
of what they had seen and heard. Why she did this she does not
know even to this day. “It seemsd the right thing to do,” she
told me. “There was something intensely intimate about it. It
was just something you couldn’t talk about.”
The Angel of Peace! Who and what could he be? There are
angels and angels, there are ranks and hierarchies of angels; and it
is nothing new, in the long history of God’s People for one of them
to appear and to speak. No one with the gift of faith can doubt that
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHYdZXQSMXefSqY4mOFGOtgOXFgI7NhsPK0QTgJ96e7zJq2aA4JqiQcS24eyZ1dtqS4aqmEKpQ51amZwZfaSnecgguWkJ6QJH7YZs3GuUkoHtlZq1tMVYVGAXwIZkv7al634CnkDA=w491-h810-v0
39 Our Lady of Fatima
the Archangel Raphael guided young Tobias; he is the angel of
health, of joy, of happy lovers, of safe travelers. Or that Gabriel
told Daniel the time of the Incarnation, and announced to Mary
that she was to be the Mother of the Christ; Gabriel, the spirit of
consolation, the Power of God. It is to the Archangel Michael,
however, that Catholic liturgy applies the name of Angel of Peace—
Angelus pads Michael.2 Yet in keeping with the paradoxical nature
of all things Christian, he is also the heavenly warrior, armed with
a fiery brand, chief of that
embattled flaming multitude
Who rise, wing above wing, flame above flame,
And like a storm, cry the Ineffable Name,
And with the clashing of their sword-blades make
A rapturous music, till the morning break,
And the white hush end all but the loud beat
Of their long wings, the flash of their white feet.3
He it was who at the dawn of time cast down the disobedient
hosts of Lucifer. It was he who stood by the closed gates of Eden,
brandishing his flaming sword. He guards the body of Eve until
the Judgment Day. He hid the body of Moses to save God’s
People from the sin of worshiping it, to which Satan incited them.
Some say it was he who led the Hebrews to the Promised Land and
shattered the host of Sennacherib. Always the protector of the
Synagogue under the Old Law, he naturally became the champion
of God’s People under the New. Many apparitions have been
recorded of him besides the one in Cornwall that Milton refers to
in Lycidas. In the fifth century, for instance, Saint Gregory the
Great saw him sheathing his fiery blade on top of Hadrian’s Tomb
in Rome, as a sign that God had accepted the penance of the
2 Roman Breviary, Hymn for Lauds on his feast of September 29:
"Angelus pads Michael in aedes
Coelitus nostras veniat; serenae
Auctor ut pads lacrymosa in orcum
Bello releget."
8 Yeats: To Some I Have Talked With by the Fire.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHYicbul5NZFGkt7ZyfLBGaXxwkvZ95oSJ2w7VzJZNsvxfueXfQUKRapTlz0vwpEWDmF2nSGV39SIbnlFfEscA-IAjrHQF0IsI8jizKLgAulA5XAWn_sWV7dPDdZx-bWXTFsv5Vlw=w491-h810-v0
4° Our Lady of Fatima
Romans, and would end the pestilence that scourged them for their
sins; and many angel voices were heard about the image of Our
Lady, which the holy Pope bore at the head of the procession.
Finally, it is Michael, according to Saint John in the Apocalypse,
who will deal out final and everlasting death to the Dragon at the
end of time, after those days in which men shall behold in heaven
“A woman clothed with the