 any of
2 So ends another of Marto’s recollections in De Marchi, op. cit., pp. 127-129.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF3oFLfNCLsxsf78uxF2e4SQlH3SkOOX6B_DaXFJXMOMOi8hzk6ZVgO5tZqL911P8dt_0TUlH8aYQDQSGZLc9efhW09hHk3BbTzJD7dyR1obwEvHAaFxthFWJpIcKUgMJvjlXhQMQ=w491-h810-v0
120 / Our Lady of Fatima
it!” Everyone took it for granted that she was the official custodian
of the shrine. So on hands and knees she crawled this way and
that, picking up all she could find; and when she had them all
gathered on the table, the total came to 1340 reis.3
On Tuesday, the fourteenth, Maria Carreira took this treasure
in a bag to the home of Ti Marto. He refused to accept it, saying
sarcastically, “Don’t tempt me, woman, for I am already tempted.”
Next she offered it to Lucia. And she remembers that the child
said:
“God defend me! I don’t want it either!”
The good soul then took it to the Prior of Fatima. Father
Ferreira by this time was heartily sick of the whole affair of Cova
da Ina, which had so disturbed his tranquility and that of his
parish, and he shrank away as if the money were accurst.
“And then the mustard stuck in my nose too,” Maria recalls,
with great dignity, “and I said, ‘Well! / don’t want it either,
and I’m going to put it right back where I got it.’ ”
The Prior raised his hand in protest, “Don’t do that, woman!
Keep it, or deliver it to someone who will keep it until we see
what is to be done about all this!”
Maria Carreira took the money home and hid it. Yet there
was no peace in its possession. Everyone wanted to know what
she intended to do with it. If one of her daughters had a new
pair of shoes, eyebrows were raised significantly. One day a self-
appointed committee of four men called upon her to demand
the hoard, saying they were going to build a chapel on the site
of the apparitions. “Not a reis shall you have,” exclaimed Maria.
Afterwards she was afraid she had been wrong. Perhaps Our
Lady wanted these men to make a shrine. She hurried to Fatima
to offer the money once more to the Prior. No, he would have
none of it.
Finally, she remembered that the owner of the land on which
3 Less than two dollars.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGPQ6caOJ9ae2qE3X3k9h9nxQHLsckKMjQIyxHLWHdMdOWTvU0Mg2mSxRmOBGS-Nl5gAfcNbejGHrtdHuz074oXwHI-M7iK6U5ia8nT8xK64Lpv8a1mEruc-b8zNPqh016rPnbFnA=w491-h810-v0
the money had been cast was Lucia’s father. If anyone ought to
have something to say about the disposal of it, it was he; and
his consent would certainly be necessary if a chapel was ever
to be built. She was afraid of Antonio Abcbora. People had told
her what he had said about her: “If I meet that woman from
Moita in the Cova, the thing won’t stop there!” and some had
warned her to avoid him, especially in his cups. Perhaps the best
time to talk with him would be just after Mass. On August 15,
the Sunday after the arrest of the children, she got up her courage
and went, not without some qualms, to his house in Aljustrel.
And sure enough, she found him “without a drop on him.”,
“I am told that Senhor Antonio is much offended,” she began,
“because I go to his land in Cova da Ilia for flowers, and so on.
And I would like to ask his permission to continue to go there.” *
“Take as many flowers as you want,” he replied, unexpectedly
genial. “What I won’t stand for is building a tabernacle on my
property. Some people have already asked me, but I won’t have it.”
Maria thanked him and took her leave. She thought it better
not to mention the money. But she had another idea. She sought
out Lucia again and begged her to ask Our Lady, the next time
she saw her, what to do with the treasure. The child said she
would, on the thirteenth of September.
That same Sunday morning (August 19) Lucia and Francisco
and his brother John took their sheep out to graze on the Serra.
She was in a happy mood. It was good to be free on a warm clear
day, like those birds that darted by in flashes of brilliant blue,
or the white butterflies that flitted more drowsily now, or even
the cicadas that sang a little wearily in the trees. So the three
strolled, played, talked, and said their prayers, until, about four
o’clock in the afternoon, they found themselves in a hollow called
Vahnhos, on the northern slope of Cabc^o and about halfway
between the cave and Aljustrel. The narrow wagon road bent
sharply there, under some large olive trees, and the ancient stone
wall on one side had fallen down, leaving an opening into a barren
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFQOfIZiGoxS8Yo57JXeaRmp3TYPNcfU_Nc2c-dNAyr7E6HOSMmujGLf2KsTPcwlwzD_3YnZICfHcLQvdg2hV9WgkYOPnjsvKyXAhDmzDXD7g1pJcIImny_BK3D_riMRleKzfxRfw=w491-h810-v0
122 Our Lady of Fatima
and rocky pasture. Beyond this were several other olive trees, and
a few dark scrubby pines and azinheiras.
Suddenly Lucia became aware of some subtle change in the
atmosphere. It was not a gathering storm, it was more like the
mysterious intensity she had always felt before any supernatural
visitation. She looked at Francisco and knew that she was right.
Yes, the Lady was coming. And Jacinta was not there.
They begged John to run and fetch her while they watched the
sheep. When they offered him two vintens or pennies he finally
consented, and lumbered off toward Aljustrel. Their eyes followed
him anxiously.
A few minutes later there was a flash of light, exactly like those
that had always heralded the approach of the Lady. They saw
Jacinta running toward them, frantically. Now she was with
them, panting, questioning.
The olive trees were a shimmer of pale silver in the slanting light
of afternoon. This might have been a corner of that hill country
of Judea where Mary went in haste to meet her cousin. But far
more brilliant than the sheen on the olives was the radiance that
now assembled at the breach in the wall just over a small azinheira,
very much like the one at Cova da Ina. And there in the midst
of the unearthly glow was the lovely familiar figure, looking
tenderly down at the young apostles who had suffered so much
for love of her.
“Que e que Vocemece me quere?” asked Lucia almost mechan¬
ically. “What is it that you want of me?”
“I want you to continue to go to Cova da Ina on the thirteenth
day and to continue to recite the Rosary every day. In the last
month I will perform the miracle so that all shall believe.”
Lucia remembered the promise she had made to Maria Carreira.
“What do you want me to do with the money that the crowd
left in the Cova da Ina?”
“Make two pedestals; one, carry it, you with Jacinta and two
other girls dressed in white, and the other let Francisco carry with
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHNHdzSCeeZYoP02HcB8xJTNtU-Jp47y8BsKL0n0fbunfpgleDEgxtDEWnpnnN5jrcM8Xn4y66nIauyHsFkrNAtg3LoTujLth40AuobJu0t78KY9AiA7D1SjpxhV7X-u3VUsMQkvQ=w491-h810-v0
I23 Our Lady of Fatima
three other boys. The money on th6 pedestals is for the feast of
the Lady of the Rosary, and that which is left over is for the sup¬
port of the chapel which they are going to have built.”
“I want to ask you to cure some sick people.”
“Yes, some I will cure during the year.”
The Lady paused, and then continued, very earnestly:
“Pray, pray a great deal, and make sacrifices for sinners, for
many souls go to hell because they have no one to sacrifice and
pray for them.”
With that she receded toward the east and vanished.4
The children remained for a long while in a state of exalted joy,
joy twice as sweet after so many troubles and disappointments. It
was the ninth day since Lucia had been taken to Ourem by her
father for the first talk with the Administrator. What a novena!
It had gone on from trial to trial, until the issue seemed almost
hopeless, only to end in glory and thanksgiving.
When they finally became capable of motion, they cut off the
branches of the shrub on which the Lady had stood, and took
them home. Ti Marto still remembers a fragrance that he can only
call magnifico. Even Maria Rosa had to admit that there was a
singularly sweet something that she had never before noticed.
Clearly she was weakening a bit. But she still maintained that
it was all nonsense about the Mother of God appearing to the
likes of her Lucia.
4 This is Lucia’s recollection of the conversation, Memoir IV, p. 40.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHhnYBGV8ARyYYYj-TDqfZXCFblrWr4T0qHTUy6kFa5OtzflofHrqubxbBep4KbzcUVkWw7V5PMExEY-ocQeD4KLrIPFrRYe8i-Qx0FR5MjwYIaQMmAAFij-QFXyYNO0lUGsNrl2Q=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER XII
The three children were standing on the narrow street of Aljustrel
discussing their adventures, when Lucia noticed, almost under
her bare brown feet, a heavy piece of rope. She picked it up idly.
“Ouch!” The shaggy coil had scratched her arm. This gave her
an idea. “Look! This hurts! We can make a girdle of it and
offer this sacrifice to God.” Dividing it forthwith, each one wore
a piece of it wrapped around the body, next to the skin. Day and
night they hugged this improvised hair shirt, even though it
pricked, chafed and itched until they could hardly tolerate it
another moment; even though it troubled their rest at night, and
sometimes would not allow them to sleep at all. What was health
compared to saving souls from hell? And what was comfort to
the joys of an eternal heaven? (f)
It hurt Jacinta more than a hair shirt to hear people cursing or
using foul language. On one such occasion she covered her face
with her hands and said, “O my God, these people don’t know
that for saying such things they can go to hell. Pardon them, my
Jesus, and convert them.” Then she would say the prayer the
Lady had told them to add to the Rosary.
There were many objective signs that these penances were
pleasing to God, and that Jacinta in particular was advancing on
the road to sainthood. She had become more patient, more long-
suffering, more affectionate; she had many visions of things that
later came to pass; and in Lucia’s opinion she must have received,
by this time, the gift of infused wisdom. One day she said three
Aves for a wretched woman with a terrible disease, and all the
symptoms vanished.
There was another woman in Aljustrel who never lost an oppor¬
tunity to revile the three children as liars and impostors. Instead
124
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHSKC-AadqtFMJEG-CTP92LB5FWZH0QW614xrs4x_HJLhh0g34bAuppx0CN6eG-tRlx-eWAjfXrRwvZS6GTVwcuyyJSWCU520lC2CyrDkY6GPlRZ5W4JvlRvWevGtwZn8KSU8XD=w491-h810-v0
of getting angry, Jacinta said, “We must ask Our Lady to convert
this woman. She has so many sins which she does not confess that
she will go to hell!” They offered some penances for her. And
never again did she give them an unkind word.
It would have been hard for the children to say which caused
them more annoyance, the hordes of the devout, or professedly
devout, who darkened their doors daily and made the lives of
their families miserable, or the opposition, which incongruously
included most of the clergy and many sincere Catholics along
with Carbonari, Radicals and Liberals of all shades of unbelief.
There was this at least to be said for the scoffers: they did not
come knocking at Lucia’s door at all hours, asking for a piece of
her kerchief as a relic, or wanting to touch her hair, or insisting
that when she saw Our Lady she remember all the symptoms of
Cousin Quiteria’s kidney trouble, or the numerous qualifications
of Brother Antonio for a better position than the one he held.
And the diatribes of the anti-clerical press gave no annoyance in
Aljustrel, because no one read them.
Yet now and then the opposition made some special effort to be
troublesome. There was a certain journalist named Jose do Vale,
who edited an anarchist paper called O Mundo (The World).
He was also a tireless pamphleteer with a distinguished gift for
excoriation and invective which his enemies attributed to a habit
of getting drunk before sitting down to write. His indignation
over the scandal at Cova da Iria was already boiling over into
pamphlets that were peddled in Torres Novas, Ourem and other
towns of the Serra.
Had this been all, the humble Christians of the Serra might
have been content to console themselves with the words, “If the
world hates you, know that it has hated Me before it hated you.
If you were of the world, the world would love its own; but
because you are not of the world, but I chose you out of the
world, therefore the world hates you.” But the editor of The
World did not stop with denunciations of priests, Jesuits, tricksters
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEpY7xcZJHKxJAUUTaAf0N9TbkTz6dib98bXpGAfuTocq4iqb3xYWK56wECrzI_6hdoHfrhwT1el75LVDeXK-L5ISeCbVmd3Jj5jewWk8Jtq5kgLuCJJoRLoU5iUJ9yPBWoIYPQ_w=w491-h810-v0
and superstitious ignoramuses. He summoned all liberals, all friends
of progress and enlightenment to hold a meeting on the following
Sunday at Fatima just after the parish Mass, to consider what
measures should be taken to unmask and punish the authors and
comedians of the farce at Cova da Iria.
On learning this, the Prior of Fatima quietly had the word
passed among his parishioners that Mass that Sunday would be at
the Chapel of Our Lady of Ortiga, two miles away. When a con¬
siderable number of fervent unbelievers assembled at Saint
Anthony’s, they found almost no one on hand except a few of
their own, including the Administrator of Ourem, the Regidor
Francisco da Silva, and Jose do Vale himself. Disappointed but
undaunted, they decided to proceed to Cova da Iria.
The Catholics of Lomba d’Egua and Moita had expected this,
and a certain peasant who had a whole herd of burros had tied
them to azinheira trees near the scene of the apparitions. As the
liberals approached, he rubbed on the nose of each “a certain
liquid” guaranteed to make any burro bray his loudest. Now,
the bray of that dwarfed animal even under the most favorable
circumstances is one of the most disturbing, not to say excruciating,
sounds in all the range of audible creation. On a dark night in a
lonely place it acquires a power to evoke blood-curdling suggestions,
such as groans of dying men on a rainy battlefield, the yowling
of gigantic alley cats, the curses and reproaches of lost souls in
pain. It was no conciliatory or complimentary sort of music, then,
that greeted the forces of enlightenment as they struggled up the
hill from the highway. And as a final insult to climax this injury,
they found waiting for them, near the azinheira where Our Lady
had appeared, a pile of straw and feed. The farmers of Moita had
spread it about as if to welcome a delegation of asses.
To make sure that the subtle point would not be missed, a group
of people from Moita, including the indomitable Maria Carreira,
were waiting on the next rise to explain it with loud and lusty
scorn. This enraged some of the newcomers so much that they
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHvq2arNY3Ha8aIJv1AGZGxzwD5n6DtxdiO6o4jyYuyBAyTvkB1hv-iVTSfCyPJfdQumpBIgvLg6L-K2WFsXSPtAxqeej8JcjS8FM6G95Y5444T1ZYiKbWAiGhukNN5G0vY30PpMw=w491-h810-v0
began to shout back some highly uncomplimentary things about
Catholics and the Church. The faithful countered this with:
“Viva Jesus e Maria! Viva Jesus e Maria!”
This drew another taunt from the invaders. The shouts echoed
back and forth through the clear air of Cova da Ina. The Catholics
would cry:
“O burros, o burros, o bestas!” “Burros! Beasts!”
And the Freethinkers would retort:
“Botas da serra! Botas da serra!” “Clodhoppers! Mountain
clodhoppers!”
The appearance of some policemen put an end to this in good
time. But the incident had revealed how tensely the inhabitants
of the highlands, both believers and non-believers, were waiting
for the thirteenth day when, according to the three children, the
Lady had promised to return to Cova da Ina. On the twelfth of
September the roads were full of pilgrims, and by evening the
houses of the Martos and Aboboras were surrounded by them,
as on the previous occasion. Most of these people slept in the
fields. At sunrise on the thirteenth there were thousands of them
at Aljustrel and Cova da Iria, reciting the Rosary or the Litany of
Our Lady.
By the time the three children were ready to start for the place
of the apparitions, the main highway was so jammed that it was
impossible to move. “All wanted to see and talk with us,” wrote
Lucia. “There was no human respect in that crowd! Many of
them, and even gentlemen and noblemen, broke through the
press and knelt before us, asking us to present their necessities
to Our Lady. Others, unable to get near, would shout:
“ ‘For the love of God, ask Our Lady to cure my son, who is
lame!’
“ ‘Ask her to cure mine, who is blind!’
“ ‘And mine who is deaf!’
“ ‘And to bring my sons home from the war!’
“ ‘And my husband!’ \
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFu4z7M1ewFoKDJkrORvy1l_C57_2juL5iU3tPx-mvJWuxCPk4qp9W1X20v-EMe5bY5oMPuZ3qL845AtGAJG8hS5sYwdr0mTh0vkbMClCz13wCMmzdo3BOFdop_7T9vzt-Cf-3F6A=w491-h810-v0
^128 Our Lady of Fatima
“ ‘And to convert a sinner for me!’
‘To give me health, for I have tuberculosis!’
“And so on. In that place appeared all the miseries of poor
humanity,” continued Lucia, “and some shouted even from the
tops of trees and walls where they had climbed to see us pass.
Saying ‘Yes’ to some, giving a hand to others to help them get
up out of the dust of the earth, we managed to move along, thanks
to some gentlemen who went ahead opening a passage for us
through the multitudes.
“When now I read in the New Testament such enchanting
scenes of the passage of Our Lord through Palestine, I remember
these that Our Lady made me a witness of when I was so young,
on those poor roads and streets from Aljustrel to Fatima and to
Cova da Iria, and I give thanks to God, offering Fhm the faith
of our good Portuguese multitude; and I think, ‘If these people
so humbled themselves before three poor children only because
they had been granted mercifully the grace to speak with the
Mother of God, what would they not do if they saw before them
Jesus Christ Himself? . . . Finally we arrived at Cova da Iria,
near the canasqueira,