 made every effort to
break down her calm reticence, after he had even accused Ti Marto
of being an accomplice in a gigantic fraud, he admitted that he
believed they were speaking the truth.
Yet when the attitude of a priest could be so distrustful and so
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHtBknC1WdaAdgKNRuHVENHCumjIUhYIt7oGJVzYA10e5WzzpE5Ep3YuRJ1r4rcSZ9SUTwGE5Tqba3GWPwt6cY8N79LmlFDNZhFBSbtAmXh9UWhK5OZRg5xcLqiwSabs6ZeD51zwg=w491-h810-v0
menacing, ic is no wonder that Maria Rosa was almost at her
wits’ end with fear and weariness. She was convinced that Lucia
was about to be exposed and punished at last. Indeed, all the
Aboboras but Lucia were in a state of something like panic when
that twelfth of October dawned over Aljustrel. Was it not bad
enough, reasoned Maria Rosa and her husband, that their child
had begun the deception in the first place; worse, that she had
stubbornly carried it on all these months; but worst of all, that
she had had the incredible effrontery to promise the whole world
a miracle, no less, at a definite hour on a definite day, the thirteenth
of October! And what would cheated people say and do when
the miracle did not occur? Undoubtedly they would turn in anger
on Lucia and tear her to pieces. Many of the villagers were making
similar predictions. One woman said that Lucia Abobora ought
to be burned before she caused the destruction of them all.
Maria Rosa made a last pathetic appeal to her daughter.
“It is better for us to go and tell everything,” she said. “People
say we are going to die tomorrow in the Cova da Iria. If the Lady
does not make the miracle, the crowd will kill us.”
“I am not afraid, Mother,” replied Lucia. “I am sure the Lady
will do everything she has promised.”
“We had better go to confession, to be prepared for death.”
“If you want me to go with you to confession, I will, but not
for that reason.”
Maria Rosa turned away, almost distracted.
That afternoon the sky became overclouded, and a fine cold
mist began to fall over the gloomy autumnal expanse of the Serra
da Aire. Shepherds in Aljustrel locked the beasts up early, for it
was plain that thick weather was brewing in the northeast.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGog8ZhvUdYuIK8kIV1LWrUYnHZNw1Lc5F-wL11aydOYY75JMF-7_66gjCeSK3rtcCflzJJwmuyaFNn0aLZCPq6Fvxh7w2Gct7xkVTbxRf6s5IgQ1lW24x-M_rUNxtxChb9-Jo2Ig=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER XIII
What a night! It was as i£ the devil, somewhere in the ice and
snow that could never slake the burning o£ his pain, had resolved
to destroy with one blow all that remained of the Europe which
had so long been his battleground against the Thing he hated
most. Somewhere in the dark misery of Siberia, he was permitted,
heaven knows why, to disturb the equilibrium of the air, setting
in motion a cold and cutting blast that shrieked across the continent
to the western sea. It may have passed howling over a cabin in
Finland where a little lynx-eyed man who called himself Lenin
was waiting to enter St. Petersburg (he had lately sown the seeds
of revolution there), and to begin, in a very few weeks, the trans¬
formation and destruction of all that world which owed what
was best and noblest in it to the teachings of Christ. It screamed
in mockery over vast armaments moving stealthily through
Germany to prepare for the “peace through victory” drive of 1918.
It scourged poor wretches of both armies into the cover of slimy
dugouts all along the western front, and plastered with mud the
Italian fugitives from Caporetto. It seemed to echo and enlarge
the despair that was settling over the vineyards of war-wearied
France, where Haig stood, as he said, with his back to the wall.
Finally it dashed itself against the Pyrenees, and then, as if it had
gathered up all the hatreds and discontents of disobedient men
and all the rebellious powers of a corrupted nature in its mad
career from the Baltic to Cape Saint Vincent, it let them all loose
on the little country that has never been permanently conquered,
the land where she who treads upon the serpent’s head has long
been honored, the terra da Santa Maria.
Darkness fell swiftly, with blacker clouds scudding from the
northeast, and huge shapeless masses of fog drifting along the
*39
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHZoA1cAMtIRSb_Qpk1ZR44rmJvCOtQX55B78p5La0FRYzg4kTsgS8xAqX__jBqidHzuuquERWMw1EjibSWQc_wpbgpb6kRFLsfl8U-YijjOg9DlNhJVT2hJ4QN6-jvWtfL_KA8OA=w491-h810-v0
mountain sides and down the river valleys to the ocean. As the
drizzle thickened to a fine, cold, slanting rain, the wind, whipped
to a gale, bent under it the waving and moaning plumes of the
pine forests near Leiria; it ripped the square sails of ancient wind¬
mills on the gray heights of the Serra da Aire; it scattered pale
glistening leaves of poplars and aspens across the swollen Tagus;
it flattened the plucked and reddened vineyards of Braga and the
withered gardens of Moita and Fatima; it went roaring across
hundreds of miles of narrow beaches until the frothy Atlantic
bellowed back in anger, and cast up vengeful floods into village
streets. The rain fell steadily, pitilessly.
Yet there were thousands of human beings and many beasts
on the roads of the little Republic that night. For faith is stronger
than doubt, and love is hardier than hate. Devout Catholics in
every village had heard by this time that Our Lady had promised
to return to Cova da Ina to perform a miracle on October 13. Rain
or shine, that was all they needed to know. Peasant families slung
their wicker baskets and earthen water jugs over their shoulders,
or packed them in panniers on the backs of burros, and started
out under the lowering skies. Fathers and mothers carried sick or
lame children in their arms for incredible distances. Fishermen
left their nets and boats on the beaches of the Vieira and took
tO'the oozy roads. Farmhands from Monte Real, sailors from ships
in the harbors of Porto or Algarve, factory workers from Lisboa,
serranas from Minde or Soublio, ladies and gentlemen, scrub¬
women, waiters, young and old, rich and poor, all sorts of people
(but most of them humble, most of them barefoot, most of them
workers and their families) were plodding through the mud under
the pelting rain that night, like a great scattered army converging
upon Fatima, hoping to find there some favor of health or con¬
version, forgiveness of sin, consolation for sorrow, the beginning
of a better life, the blessing of the Mother of God.
It made no difference to these devotees if saturated trousers or
skirts sloshed around their tired legs as their bare feet plowed
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGVPZiJISO2hpKCFTvUIo9N5uEDiW6yzxAyWOD5YSDjoqRokbjibz-diSx5v3tiufp4OQHNT15QjW__hT3VMFCnBHJOv9ocFYoM2ioYb9biyZrwyYpg5zWa1KPXy-OuZ_6tIVPB=w491-h810-v0
the mud or spattered the puddles of bad roads. Laughter was heard
among groups of several families as they walked along together.
Fragments of old hymns would echo back from the wet cliffs, or
come floating down out of the darkness of a lonely road. “Ave,
Ave, Ave Maria!” Not for nothing had the ancestors of these
people sung the Salve Regina on the decks of galleons in the
Indian Ocean or whalers in the China Sea. It might have been a
useful lesson for some of the politicians at Lisboa if they could
have heard those songs.
They were not left wholly uninformed, however. Avelino de
Almeida, managing editor of O Seculo, the largest newspaper in
Lisboa, who was on his way to cover the story at Cova da Iria,
described some of the pilgrims he met near Chao de Ma^as, before
the rain began to fall:
“Nearly all, men and women, have bare feet, the women carrying
their footgear in bags on their heads, the men leaning on great
staves and carefully grasping umbrellas also. One would say they
were all oblivious to what was going on about them, with a great
lack of interest in the journey and in other travelers, as if lost in a
dream, reciting their Rosary in a sad rhythmic chant. A woman says
the first part of the Hail, Mary; her companions in chorus say the
second part of the prayer. With sure and rhythmical steps they tread
the dusty road which runs between the pine woods and the olive
groves, so that they may arrive before night at the place of the
apparition, where, under the serene and cold light of the stars, they
hope they can sleep, keeping the first places near the blessed
azinheira so that today they can see better.”
It was not devotion that took the editor of O Seculo to Fatima.
Almeida was a Freemason who made no secret of his dislike for
priests, sacraments, creeds and dogmas. He was covering the story
because it had been too much talked about to be ignored, and he
was one of the best newspaper men in Portugal. His dispatch,
published in O Seculo on the morning of October 13, reveals him
as a kindly, cynical gentleman in the Newmanian sense, one who
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEYy4EbeMWsrgVwAETZDMoqaTfHIBnijhiMdXkuwHGDbKTFQl-UgvRr6YNE2M-xFe1ZDXcqloT5CwO79CpR_QWsfSofkb2tVSNvhB75Eg3kdnKfYpvTNJpqJrGec9cUq1PqFqicOA=w491-h810-v0
i^2 Our Lady of Fatima
did not believe but had no wish to hurt or ridicule those who did:
“Thousands of persons are hastening to a wild expanse of country
near Ourem to see and hear the Virgin Mary. Let pious souls be not
offended and pure believing hearts be not afraid; we have no
intention of being a scandal for those who sincerely hold to their
faith and whom the miraculous still attracts, seduces, bewitches,
consoles and fortifies, as has been the case for thousands of years,
and most certainly will be for other thousands of years! . . . This
is only a short newspaper article on an event which is not new in
the history of Catholicism. . . . Some regard it as a message from
heaven and a grace; others see in it a sign and proof that the spirit
of superstition and fanaticism has planted deep roots that it is
difficult or even impossible to destroy.
“Times of great calamities have always revived and renewed
religious ideas and have favored them. And war, which strikes
everywhere, offers them the most favorable and fertile soil for
growth. We see that confirmed in the life of the trenches and even
in the spiritual atmosphere of the belligerent countries.”
After some pointed observations about the speculators who
doubtless were waiting to profit by the credulity of the masses, he
gave a fair summary of the events at Fatima, and recalled previous
apparitions of the Holy Virgin at Lourdes, La Salette, and other
places. Then he continued more ironically:
“The miracle takes place between noon and one o’clock, according
to those who have been there. But not all have the chance to see the
holy figure. The number of the elect seems very small. Despite
their efforts, many see nothing. This is why those who find
themselves near the children are contented with hearing them speak
with an invisible partner. Others, on the contrary, see in a divinely
solemn moment the stars shining in the firmament, even though
the sun be at the zenith. They hear a subterranean groaning which
announces the presence of the Lady. They claim that the tem¬
perature falls and they compare the impressions of that moment
with those they have experienced during an eclipse of the sun. . . .
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFyUTMvcnEAl5Jr4XxsjCFoswE-KV8EJ_EzCTS2SxJTIf-spDRiu7UlKj5bH917F5FwvLcmSBGYkHILNyfm3f-Sd3Xr5tU4bu5trTv6Ux-PJgwMpdRKERWoNmdDTwehAfMal2Ks=w491-h810-v0
“According to what the children say, the figure of the Virgin
appears on an azinheira, surrounded on all sides by a nuage. . . .
The suggestion of the masses, brought there by the supernatural and
captivated by a superhuman force, is so powerful that eyes fill with
tears, faces become as pale as corpses, men and women throw
themselves on their knees, chant songs and recite the Rosary
together.
“We do not know if there have already been blind persons who
have recovered their sight, paralytics who have regained the use of
their limbs, hardened sinners who are turned back from the straight
ways of sin to plunge into the purifying water of penance.
“But that matters little. The news of the apparitions has spread
from Algarve to the Minho. Since the Day of the Ascension the
pilgrims have flocked there by thousands on the thirteenth of each
month, from near and far. The means of transportation do not
suffice.
“The clergy of the place and the neighborhood maintain, as
regards the events, a prudent reserve, at least in appearance. It is
the custom of the Church. It proclaims loudly that in such circum¬
stances doubt means nothing, for doubts also come from the devil.
But secretly it rejoices over the great concourse of pilgrims who
since May have become more and more numerous.
“And there are even people who dream of a great and magnificent
church, always full, of large hotels near by with every modern
comfort, of shops well stocked with a thousand and one different
objects of piety and souvenirs of Our Lady of Fatima, and of a
railway which will take us to the future miraculous sanctuary with
more convenience than the buses in which, for the moment, the
mass of the faithful and of the curious now achieve this right. . . .”
While the author of these pessimistic observations was making
his way to Ourem, and then with deepening discomfort to Cova
da Iria, the Abobora and Marto families, after a restless night
listening to the rain pelting on the tiles, were rising in the
cheerless dawn. Indeed, the east was hardly streaked with dismal
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF_FAh-5FYGM8A3bKPrYyyHPXeViGeAnncfj14paQMsQUxSx9N9zhNiTKILKi9BoTBem40lwi5UEin9Uas2vlyua5cDAzxGQc-581pAw-EcmcyBs9MSaMxHMhCBKlLBrkVdcWgChg=w491-h810-v0
144 Our Lady of Fatima
gray when the first dripping pilgrims came knocking at their
doors. Soon there were dozens and scores of them, and they not only
surrounded the two cottages, clamoring for a glimpse of the
children, but were cheerfully forcing their way inside without
waiting to be invited. Ti Olimpia was furious at the casual way
they shed puddles of water and red mud from the fields all over
her floors. Ti Marto still twits her on how she fluttered about,
trying to get the children ready and at the same time to answer
the questions of a jostling mob. It was too much when these
strangers began to make themselves comfortable on her beds and
chests.
“Get out of here, all of you!” she cried.
The people paid no attention. A few more pushed their way in.
“Leave them alone, woman,” advised her husband. “When the
house is full, no more will be able to get in.”
A neighbor plucked him by the sleeve and said in his ear:
“Ti Marto, you’d better not go to Cova da Ina. They might
beat you up. The little ones, no. They are babies, no one is
going to hurt them. You are the one in danger of being mussed up.”
“I’m going openly,” returned the other, “and I’m not afraid
of anybody. I have no doubt everything will be all right.”
Olimpia did not share this confidence. She was praying fer¬
vently to Our Lady to protect her and her family that day, and
she still wonders how her children could have remained so calm
and unafraid in the midst of all that confusion.
“If they hurt us,” said Jacinta, “we are going to heaven. But
those that hurt us, poor people, are going to hell.”
One of the intruders in the house of Ti Marto was a Baroness
from Pombalinho, who insisted on presenting two ornate dresses,
a blue one for Lucia, a white one for Jacinta. The girls declined
these, preferring their own white Communion attire. Finally,
after infinite confusion, they managed to get a bite to eat and
to squirm out of the house.
At the last moment Maria Rosa put on her shawl and said
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFHov0U0roZpP13T6AFKFOF4BbD3xVrj6IvMG0bS4lsOnQJYwsbs-MefmLcyIzgW9AMJLbvwXEJqgGfP7mHM5swvPp1O3Rtb_NE19kvKMUVF6BGejZK2enk1gNh0tKTBoesBelp=w491-h810-v0
she would accompany them. “I know they are going to kill you,”
she said tearfully to Lucia. “Very well, then, if you must go, I
will go and die with you.”
It was a long and slow journey. The highroad was crowded
all the way from Fatima to Cova da Iria. Men and women
were kneeling in the thick slime on both sides, imploring
their prayers. Hands reached out to touch them. Wet burros
brushed against them. Umbrellas threatened to poke out their eyes.
But what a sight when at last they arrived near the scene of the
apparitions! Fully 70,000 men, women and children, people of
all ages and conditions, were standing patiently in the rain waiting
for them—a dark mass under innumerable black umbrellas,
dripping sombreros, soaked blankets. They were packed so
densely between the highway and the azinheira that the children
were able to get through only with the help of a chauffeur, who
seized Jacinta and mounted her on his shoulder, crying, “Make
way for the children who saw Our Lady!”
Ti Marto followed with Lucia and Francisco. When they
reached the place of the apparitions, he was surprised to find his
wife already there. He had forgotten her in his anxiety for Jacinta.
“My Olimpia turned up from another direction, I don’t know
from where,” he confesses.
At all events there she was close to the stump of the azinheira,
which Maria Carreira had lovingly draped, along with her alms
table, under garlands of flowers. The crowd lurched and swayed
this way and that, ducked umbrellas, huddled together for warmth,
scanned the leaden eastern sky. Loud voices were repeating the
Rosaiy in various rhythmical cadences. A priest who had been pray¬
ing all night in the rain and mud was reading his breviary and
from time to time nervously fingering his watch. Presently he
turned to the children and asked at what hour Our Lady was
going to arrive.
“At midday,” replied Lucia.
He glanced at his watch again, and said, disapprovingly:
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG5pTOpT_jis0FR_EihfbGry_NKmckesV2ctLuQ47fhaEvpCGosKlGy8QjmGIQ-97BuMzxSqQbl4dbzWabKfbXeRB5-sro1aQaf8HhPBamgiVKHnB8DUtZ96gRp2b-EBxsSYxGaCw=w491-h810-v0
146 Our Lady of Fatima
“It is midday already. Our Lady is not a liar. We shall see.”
Nearly all the people now were saying the Rosary. “Ave, Maria,
cheia de graga . . . Santa Maria, Mai de Deus, rogai por nos
pecadores . .
“Put down your umbrellas!” cried Lucia—-why she never knew
—and one after another they obeyed, although the rain was still
falling. “Put down your umbrellas!” said one after another. They
all stood patiently in the rain.
A few