 eachopa, and he made a gesture of dismissal,
whereat one of his underlings told them all to be off.
The Administrator followed them to the door and said pointedly
to Lucia:
“If you don’t tell that secret, it will cost you your life!” 5
The frightened child glanced back at the dark frowning face
in the doorway. He looked as if he meant it.
It was late in the day when they got back to Aljustrel. Antonio
probably betook himself to the nearest tavern to recuperate from
the ordeal. Lucia slipped away from the reproachful questions and
censorious eyes of her mother and sisters to seek a few minutes
of peace at the old well. Francisco and Jacinta were kneeling there
on the stone slabs. Jacinta had kept her promise; they had been
there since morning.
“Ai, Lucia!” she cried, running to embrace her. “Your sister
told us they had killed you!”
One of the older girls had gone out to diraw some water, and
perhaps had dropped the remark as a jest. Francisco and his sister
had taken it seriously. Yet here was Lucia alive and free! They
all laughed and gamboled as the cool wind freshened the parched
fields, and the lamps of the angels began faintly to glitter.
The next day, August 12, was Sunday, but not a very quiet
one at Aljustrel. In every village of the Serra, in fact, there was
tense expectation regarding what might happen on Monday, and
B So ends Ti Marto’s account to Father De Marchi, pp. iio-m.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGCSwwfnMPMhvqbU-fpn1m-4LRJdOXBdBYzFPdeFh-dHds0ZF8nQ5MVvjB8B9ePc_oqRrCbpPnX1mK7-OB7b9N1Ik01sfSOCffwV-BtPI4enYwKyVJ4qIzZWpKOkq3-SvPzb9W3=w491-h810-v0
pilgrims were already on the march, whole families of peasants
with their wicker lunch baskets and earthenware water bottles,
some with blankets wrapped around their necks or packed on
their shoulders, to sleep in on the dry grass under the stars. All
day these poor wayfarers, and with them a scattering of more
prosperous ones in carriages and automobiles, kept arriving at
Aljustrel to visit the houses of Ti Marto and Antonio Abobora,
to ask questions, to take photographs, to tell the favors they
wanted from Our Lady on the morrow. Jobs, love, money, cures,
conversions, promotions—all the desires of the human heart were
poured out upon the three bewildered children. Maria Rosa was
almost beside herself. The insolence of these strangers! And the
iniquity of a girl who would cause such a commotion with her
lying tongue! At one stage of the confusion Lucia was tempted
to accept the invitation of an aunt from Cascais, who offered to
smuggle them all to her house and keep them there until the excite¬
ment had blown over. But they had promised Our Lady to be
at Cova da Ina August 13, and at Cova da Ina they would be.
' Toward evening the Abobora cottage was completely surrounded
by a noisy crowd. “In the hands of those people,” wrote Lucia,
“we were like a ball in the hands of a little girl. Each one pulled
us in his direction and asked his question, without ever giving
us tune to answer anybody.” In the midst of all this, who should
appear but three policemen from Ourem, to summon them to the
house of Ti Marto, where the Administrator in person was wait¬
ing, and to drop more than one dark hint that death might be
the penalty for further silence on their part.
“Never mind,” whispered Jacinta, tightening her pretty lips.
“If they kill us, so much the better, for then we will see Jesus
and Our Lady.”
In the interrogation which followed, Santos demanded the
secret and their promise not to return to Cova da Iria. When the
children refused on the ground that they could not disobey the
Lady, he took another tack and suggested, with unexpected affa-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGFtcKY_FtnBfTNr9Zn75aHLDKYc9lc4LdvfLZ2f6hd9WV2SNyR3JHz-MZ-qiTY-iG4782QiYRWDNHbiF3Z661TD0dq8h59crgsG8i8yLh45HzhYoBp7OV3uVOQVzXPmxwVerSTCQ=w491-h810-v0
;ic>4 Our Lady of Fatima
bility, that after all the man to look into matters of this sort was
the Senhor Prior, Father Ferreira. Ffe wanted to know whether
the parents of the little ones would have any objection to their
going to the rectory next morning before keeping their rendezvous
at Cova da Iria. Fatima, after all, was on the way to the place of
the apparition. It would take only a few minutes to see the Paroco.
With this he took his leave, amid general relief.
Early the next morning Ti Marto went out to do some hoeing
in a field near his house. The task finished, he returned and began
to wash the thick red soil off his hands, in preparation for his
breakfast. As he was doing this he noticed that his wife had come
into the house, and was making stealthy gestures to indicate that
he was wanted outside.
“All right, all right,” said Ti Marto, continuing to scrub his
great calloused hands.
Olimpia’s motions became more frantic.
“What’s the hurry?” asked her husband. “I’m coming.” And
in leisurely fashion he began to dry his hands. Before he could
finish, the door darkened, and looking up, he saw the Administrator
of Ourem glaring at him.
“Ah, so it’s you, Senhor Administrator?”
“It’s true. I also want to go to the miracle.”
Ti Marto’s heart gave a thump. There was something wrong
here, for all the geniality of the reply, and he noticed that Santos
looked nervous, and kept glancing about the cottage, now here,
now there, as he went on, rapidly:
“Let’s all go together. I will take the little ones with me in the
wagon. See and believe like Saint Thomas! Where are the children,
by the way? Time is getting on. You’d better have them called.”
“It isn’t necessary to invite them,” answered the other drily.
“They know when they have to fetch the cattle and get ready
tog°-”
Just then the children came in, and the Administrator, all smiles
and benignity, invited them to ride with him to Cova da Iria.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH6G4wEJL6ORp-ME8D_IxD_RpOreNzQnK-RJQWNsX3PI0s2AxZIzZSii_qD5XjqiaqbNsqdorJneUEm2hLeaXz3jvZT39szSs135e69OFPne90mXRI99q4hR4vygnDj1YuszF_N5A=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima io5
“No, thank you, Senhor,” said Francisco.
“We can walk all right,” added Jacinta.
“We’ll get there earlier this way, and you won’t be bothered
by people on the road.”
“Don’t put yourself out, Senhor Administrator.” It was Ti
Marto speaking. “They can get there all right.”
“Besides,” continued the official, “we’ll have more time to stop
at Fatima, at the house of the Prior. He wants to ask them some
questions, you know!”
As none of them could think of an answer to that, the children,
with many misgivings, piled into the wagon, Francisco sitting in
front with the Administrator, the two girls behind, while Ti Marto
and Antonio followed on foot. It was only a minute or two to the
church at the top of the hill. Arriving there, Santos dismounted,
and going up the rectory steps, shouted:
“First!”
“First what?” demanded Ti Marto, who had managed to keep
up with the wagon.
“Lucia!” called the Administrator peremptorily.
“Go ahead, Lucia,” said her uncle, and the child got out of
the wagon and entered the rectory.
“You can stay there for now,” added Santos to the younger
children.
The Prior was waiting in his study. It seems plain enough that
he had changed from a cautious and kindly reserve to something
like hostility. Perhaps he had been disturbed by the growing
notoriety of the affair and the opposition of the public authorities,
and wanted to spare the Church from further persecution at a
time when she was harassed and straitened enough.
“Who taught you to say the things that you are going about
sayfhg?” he inquired.
“That Lady whom I saw at Cova da Iria.”
The Prior’s face was severe.
“Anyone who goes around spreading such wicked lies as the
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG-XIv-WeE9938xizSnNFeSG0h8rhYYeBQoU79psvQWmq01e3tEwgk8AeJP1J2g08AhiS53qK2kLIAxLazTy0mqV4iG545Drb1e2knA1BzKlWEcCTfycjHGXg_jYVBbi_PZtGdtUg=w491-h810-v0
io6 Our Lady of Fatima
lies you tell will be judged, and will go to hell if it isn’t true.
More and more many people are being deceived by you.”
“If anyone who lies goes to hell, I will not go to hell,” said
the ten-year-old girl, looking him in the eyes, “for I don’t lie and
I tell only what I have seen and what the Lady has said to me.
And as for the crowd that goes there, they only go because they
want to. We don’t call anybody.”
“Is it true that that Lady confided a secret to you?”
“Yes, Senhor Prior.”
“Tell it, then.”
“I can’t tell it. But if Your Reverence wants to know it, I will
ask the Lady, and if she gives me permission, I will tell you.”
“Come,” interrupted the Administrator at this point, “these
are supernatural matters. Let us be going.” 8
With that he led Lucia outside, and brusquely ordered her
into the wagon. As the child obeyed, Santos jumped in after her,
seized the reins and cracked the whip.
Ti Marto and Antonio Abobora, wondering what was afoot
now, saw the beast turn sharply and bolt down the road, not
toward Cova da Ina, but in the opposite direction.
“You’re going the wrong way!” cried Lucia.
“It’s all right,” Santos assured her cheerfully. “We’ll stop and
see the Prior at Ourem a moment. Then I’ll take you to Cova da
Iria by automobile. You’ll be there in time!” and he threw some
blankets or mantles over the three children, to hide them from
the pilgrims who, in growing numbers, were trudging along the
road toward Cova da Ina.
When the wagon passed out of; sight in a cloud of fine white
dust, Ti Marto and his brother-in-law turned and followed the
people who were straggling along the highway toward the west.
Santos had said he would drive the children to Cova da Ina, and
Ti Marto may have assumed, with characteristic calm, that for
6 De Marchi gives this conversation, from the Canonical Process, op. cit., p. 114, n. 1.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGTr2ZIiXSXTkWbJDrH0kQJ3Uhtcqztj8sQ8Ovkxzwq8yoh45Qcg5RS63Z7C9yGHu80BYxkkAJItb6nlqE3Dz5c_A91-LAh5rUkhPmf9FJHJo1HUl10DLFQ6sGoLaazQ1aVKJjd=w491-h810-v0
some reason to be explained in due course the Administrator had
decided to go by another road. When the two men reached the
scene half an hour later, they were astonished to find more than
6,000 persons gathered there. Some had come walking barefoot for
three or four days, from distant villages, at enormous inconvenience,
to present their petitions to Our Lady; others had arrived on mules,
burros, horses, bicycles; a few in carnages, and some in automobiles.
All were asking where the children were, for it was close upon noon.
Some of them were frightened and ill at ease. They had been
told that there was a small extinct volcanic crater near Cova da Iria,
as in fact there was, and that it was all a trick of the devil to get these
good people in one place, and then have it open up and swallow
them in its fiery depths. Others scoffed at this fear. Maria Carreira
of Moita, for one, was not going to let such a threat keep her from
attending an apparition of Our Lady. In fact she had arranged a
table with flowers on it as a sort of altar or repository, and had
supervised the erection of a rustic arch, with some crosses tied to it,
and two hanging lamps to mark the spot at night. It seems
incredible, but Maria Rosa is said to have contributed something
toward these lamps; and her oldest daughter was helping to
arrange the arch and the table.
But where were the children?
About twelve o’clock some of those around the azinheira began
saying the Rosary, and gradually the whole throng joined in. Then
a faint murmuring sound was heard, followed by what seemed to be
a rumble of thunder—some thought in the road, others in the
little tree, still others in the far horizon. Here and there a frightened
cry was heard: “We are all going to die!” and a few ran away.
Most of them stood silent and rather fearful. Presently they saw a
flash of light, and then, far over their heads to the east, something
like a little cloud, frail, white, transparent, filmy, that floated slowly
down until it came to rest above the azinheira. A moment later it
rose again and melted away into the blue sky.
As the people stared at one another and all about in wonder and
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEBJVfMcETOF6ZPronnp7LZkdJ6186HDAVnyqAPz8f1G0faepVBd7xLPzERAaockT3uhjxLCswTP-l1tt8miCejhdZPI0v1TG85bQRbgCT-J_GgYekwt_HGDxDCc-1jDbeh3pNe=w491-h810-v0
surprise, many noticed a strange fact, to which Maria Carreira and
others testify even to this day: their faces were richly tinted with
the various colors of the rainbow, and even their garments were red,
yellow, blue, orange, and so on, while the foliage of the trees and
bushes seemed like brilliant flowers instead of leaves, and the dry
earth itself was checkered with different gorgeous hues. “There is
no doubt Our Lady had come,” says Maria Carreira, “but she didn’t
find the children.” And where were the little rascals? The question
was on all lips again.
Thus far Ti Marto and Antonio had said nothing about the odd
conduct of the Administrator. And now they saw some people
arriving with news that he had taken his prisoners first to the
Prior, and then to his own house at Ourem.
So the Administrator was the one who had spoiled the apparition,
and disappointed the Mother of God! And the Prior! The crowd
at once leaped to the conclusion that the two had conspired together
to frustrate them; and as the implications of this suspicion dawned
upon the tired minds of those who had walked so many miles to be
there, or had given up a day’s work and a day’s pay to do honor to
Our Lady, all the various emotions of reverence, fear, expectation,
affection, hope, and curiosity became fused by the subtle alchemy
of mob emotion into one tense vibration of human anger. The
whole assembly, as if congealed by indignation into a monster with
one mind and six thousand heads, burst into a shout of rage that
made the hot air tingle, and was heard as far away as Aljustrel,
more than two miles distant. Well for the Administrator, well for
the Prior, that they were not at Cova da Iria that moment; Father
Ferreira, at least, was convinced, as he wrote in a letter denying the
charge of collusion, that he would have been murdered on the spot.
Bitter voices began to wrangle and expostulate throughout the
mass. Some cried, “Down with the Administrator!” Another
yelled, “Down with the Prior!” For a moment it looked as if not
even distance would save the two from the hands of this self-
appointed court of hangmen, for such a mob is; and hundreds of
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGrpAAcZBH-B0MJGsKOfiiQS0KdH-qRPyGvJp7q91ToyKX5LDhUyBP2_01kKgtuFxnqwRlt5_EhHgPKuKnbBqQkkgRIiO_LN9j3DVaHzxRin8TGl20X9Cj0nIwDr9Jx7uGk6d9ADQ=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 109
the men, still roaring their grievance, began to move as mobs move,
' with a terrible purposeful unity, with glazed eyes that see nothing
but blood, and hands that grope for the necks of victims.
“To Fatima and settle with the Prior!”
“To Ourem and have it out with the Administrator!” shouted
another.
“And the Regidor!” added a third.
They might at least have got to Fatima, if not Ourem, had they
not come face to face with a little man of courage and presence of
mind, who raised his hand and spoke with an air of command.
“Boys, take it easy!” he cried. “Don’t hurt anyone! Whoever
deserves punishment will receive it. All this is by the power of the
One above!”
This is Ti Marto’s recollection of what he said that day. And
after a moment of hesitation the mob wavered, stopped, and began
to break up into groups.
Ti Marto makes very little of this. He was more concerned about
his children, and how he could get them out of the hands of their
captor.
“And I went home,” he concludes, “and found my wife
weeping.”7 /
7 De Marchi, p. 117.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF2wbvxjAES5PiEnckrdNesirkdmv8zkI5uY1YQEPqP2zl2DHJ4WdoY4MxkV10i63nrwoI-ZcwtsV3xryAJ5h78gIeBHgCp5duymoN0WVMV9h2eOAccJOwRvKngKyNNV3OpmCUMDQ=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER XI
If Ti Olimpia had reason to weep, the Administrator of Ourem
was highly pleased with the success of his bold plan to kidnap her
children. It gave him a certain sardonic pleasure to think of all the
silly pious people waiting at Cova da Iria for a show in which the
principal actors would not appear. And what a joke on the Prior!
Now his parishioners would believe that he was in league with the
forces of progress and enlightenment! He would never be able to
explain that away. Best of all, Santos had the three disturbers of the
peace locked up in a room in his house, and before they got out they
were going to tell him the secret, and reveal who or what was at
the bottom of the whole ridiculous piece of medievalism. He would
leave them alone for a while, and let terror do its work.
He was not wrong in calculating that the children would be
frightened. When the clocks of Ourem began, one after another,
to announce the hour of twelve with long and solemn strokes, they
exchanged looks of utter consternation. It was the moment when
they had promised to meet the Lady at Cova da Iria.
Francisco was the first to recover. “Perhaps Our Lady is going
to appear to us here!” he said hopefully. Perhaps! They waited
for some sign, a flash of light, a movement, a heavenly voice. But
nothing happened. The noonday hour passed, and there was no
word from her. Jacinta began to cry. Francisco said, almost
tearfully:
“Our Lady must be sad because we didn’t go to Cova da Iria,
and she won’t appear to us any more.” He glanced imploringly at
Lucia. “Will she?”
“I don’t know.” The older girl was stolid and composed again.
“I think she will.”
“Oh, I want so much to see her!”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG4t9VrZ35FXZCqLiSO18MXTWCyRJ03RVNnoBOLFfMkuxDrWMQV4FAmfGNJc5W3yzXbJw6B_ZZ6Dpheu378Ui6Ro0mIuU2Mi_qXhR3rmEwIlve5G37b_ErjNz1s5-zeY1vA2J0a=w491-h810-v0
After that, as Lucia remembers, he was quite animado, quite the
little man taking care of his sister and his cousin. It was Jacinta
who burst into tears when the last hope of a visit from Our Lady
forsook them.
“Our parents will never see us again!” she wailed. “They will
never hear any more about us!”
“Don’t cry, Jacinta,” said her brother. “Let’s offer this to Jesus
for poor sinners, as