 ask her who she was?”
“I asked her where she came from, and she said, ‘I am from
heaven.’ And then she kept quiet.” 2
This at least is what that excellent woman, Maria dos Anjos,
recalls of the conversation after a quarter of a century. She was
not being unkind to Lucia. She simply did not believe the story,
and accepted her mother’s theory that the child had been perverse
enough to invent it. She felt she was only doing her duty when
she returned to the house to tell Maria Rosa all that had been said.
Lucia, of course, was summoned promptly before her parents.
Her father was inclined to dismiss the whole affair with a laugh.
“Women’s tales!” he said, as he set out for the greening fields.
“Silly women’s tales!” His wife, however, took the matter very
seriously, and gave her youngest daughter a tart scolding.
“This was all I needed for my old age!” she lamented bitterly.
“To think that I always brought my children up to speak the
truth! And now this one brings me a whopper like this!”
It was a forlorn and miserable Lucia who went out to the patio
that morning to let the sheep out of the fold. How suddenly the
world had changed from joy to misery! And then she saw Fran¬
cisco coming down the street, and looking very contrite. In fact,
he had tears in his eyes.
“Don’t cry any more,” said Lucia. “And don’t tell anyone
what the Lady told us.”
“I’ve already told it,” replied Francisco wretchedly, blaming
himself instead of Jacinta.
“What have you told?”
“I said that the Lady promised to take us to heaven. When
they asked me if that was true I couldn’t tell a he! Forgive me,
Lucia! I won’t ever tell anyone any more!”
2 Maria of the Angels’ account to Father De Marchi, who gives the entire con¬
versation, p. 66.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH_iDsqNFVVNgeC2zelsCdalzY2PpNyGSsjGYmlBbwIl5lqBCVO8-nhBZI89ceL1XI5zYmER6n5qY6SGYosojyJFPR5SUSYpNOvQ4JSYl_-K7eKaHjePsL2RtkPZhmphn2d_TRE=w491-h810-v0
59 Our Lady of Fatima
Somehow the discovery had spoiled their pleasure, and they were
all depressed when they pastured their sheep that day. Jacinta
sat pensive for a long time on a stone. Finally, Lucia said:
“Jacinta, go and play!”
“I don’t want to play today.”
“Why don’t you want to play?”
“Because I am thinking that that Lady told us to say the Rosary
and to make sacrifices for sinners. Now when we recite the Rosary
we have to say the whole Ave Maria and Padre Nostro."
“And the sacrifices? How are you going to make them?”
Francisco had an idea. “We can give our lunches to the sheep
and make the sacrifice of not eating any lunch.”
From that time on he often drank from the barreiro where the
sheep and goats took water and the women washed their clothes.
Jacinta thought of a better way of disposing of their lunches, how¬
ever. One day they saw some poor children from Moita, half a
mile away, coming to beg at Aljustrel. “Let us give them our
lunches for the conversion of sinners!” she said. And they did.
By the middle of the afternoon they were ravenously hungry, and
went looking about the moor for something to eat. Francisco tried
some of the acorns of an azinheira which were now green enough
to be edible, and found them palatable. Jacinta decided that if
they were so good it would be no sacrifice to eat them. Instead,
she picked up some acorns of a different sort under a large oak
and began to munch them. Yes, they were bitter, she admitted.
But she would offer the bad taste for the conversion of sinners.
Every day from then on Jacinta made a lunch of these bitter
aforns or of sour unripe olives.
“Don’t ear those, Jacinta!” said Lucia one day. “They are very
bitter.”
“It is for the bitterness that I eat,” said Jacinta simply. “To
convert sinners.”
It was not long before the children of poor families began to
wait for them along the roadsides to ask for their lunches. The
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHzISNpuCSDhdKv4yQ23wvN9OhRuQjY3HZtYbmJpJcJ2E_3yreY8MUTYTSKXJ8ux0t71n3kFQddjvVJlb7TT0OksI1n3aJEU8g7YF4YBZvcf770BLLWLHw23CTpM7_ycS8tJVFttA=w491-h810-v0
three always gave them cheerfully, and then ate whatever they
happened to find as they roamed about the Serra. “We used to
eat pine cones,” Lucia remembers, “roots of bind-weed, and of
a little yellowish flower that grows on the root of a little ball of
of the size of an olive; mulberries, mushrooms, and some things
that we picked from the roots of pine trees, but I don’t remember
what they are called.” 3
The most resolute in carrying out the Lady’s wishes regarding
sacrifices was Jacinta, if we are to take literally the modest recital
of Lucia. One sweltry day that summer they went to a certain
field that a neighbor had lent to Maria Rosa, and on the way,
according to custom, gave their lunches to some of the beggar
children. When they reached their destination, after a long hot
walk, they were all tired, hungry and parched. There was no water
about fit for human beings; even Francisco, apparently, was unable
to drink from the little pool where the sheep relieved their thirst.
No matter! They all offered up their pains for sinners as usual.
But the sun got hotter and hotter, and as the afternoon wore on they
found their resolution weakening, until Lucia suggested that they
go to a house not far away and ask for a little water.
When they did this, a good woman gave them a small piece of
bread, which Lucia divided with her companions, and a jug of
water, which they took back to the pasture. There Lucia offered
it first to Francisco.
“I don’t want to drink,” he said.
“Why?”
“I want to suffer for the conversion of sinners.”
“You drink, Jacinta.”
“I want to offer a sacrifice for sinners, too.”
The rest of this episode, so casually told by Lucia in her maturity,
is worthy of that King who, hot from battle and served with water
for which a soldier had risked his life, poured it on the ground
8 Memoir I, p. 13.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHCBQBRzEL11LDjh43dpipSLsSXYfn-ilFNxS5M8yS5TL4I4Uu6rb19i202I0uac3riaOltEI1qcfwl5JPZTizItWl66IfUGXAtNcyf3kOGA9e-jpGdaot0sIwtwQwrylWoej4PWg=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 61 s
as an offering of gratitude to the Lord God of Battles. The young
shepherd girl of Aljustrel was moved by a spirit no less royal than
that of the shepherd who was ancestor to the Messias and to His
Mother, Our Lady of Fatima. And like David, let us note in
passing, she was not without talent for narration:
“Then I poured the water into a hollow of the rock for the sheep
to drink, and went to return the vessel to its mistress. The heat
became more intense each moment, the grasshoppers and crickets
were joining their song to that of the frogs in the near-by pond
and were making an intolerable clamor. Jacinta, weak from fasting
and from thirst, said with the simplicity that was natural to her:
‘Tell the crickets and the frogs to keep quiet, it gives me such
a headache!’
“Francisco said, ‘Don’t you want to suffer this for sinners?’
“Jacinta, pressing her head between her little hands, said, ‘Yes,
I do. Let them sing!’ ” 4
If the children were taking the requests of the White Lady so
seriously, Maria Rosa was no less constant in her determination
to destroy what she considered a deception and a blot on the
family honor. Stung by the neighbors’ gossip, which the state of
her health perhaps made her exaggerate, she felt responsible before
God for making her daughter confess that she had imposed a he
upon the Marto children and deceived heaven knows how many
worthy citizens. With threats and promises, with scoldings and
caresses, she did all in her power to break down the serene assur¬
ance with which Lucia repeated her story. “If you don’t say it
was a lie,” she said one day, “I will lock you up in a dark room
where you will never see the light of the sun again!” Another
time in exasperation she went so far as to beat her with the end
of a broom. When all these measures failed, she took her to the
rectory to see if the Prior could bring her to remorse and restitu¬
tion. All in vain.
4 Memoir I, pp. 13-15.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHN9B7IDlSWoH119CvTjJbGLqQHbJvwJRWAKfdTbIYdtQoLzlsfdBfNeob7KpBu4OeJAv57u8LKw5NpqZQU-OhoNTTVa09wIBKPVUqyO2rNi_AL3q212gZ7a4rk_MLIQXewxm4L=w507-h822-v0
62 Our Lady of Fatima
Lucia was beginning to understand what the Lady had meant
when she said, “You will have much to suffer.” Not only did her
mother continue to coax and to rail, not only did her own sisters
lacerate her with ridicule more cruel than they could guess, but
everyone in Aljustrel seemed to have turned against her. As she
went pattering along the cobbled street, she would hear one
woman say, “If she were my child—” and another remark, “A
good strong dose of quince tea would put an end to those visions!”
Even the small children would yell, as she went by, “Hey, Lucia,
is Our Lady going to walk over the roofs today?”
Yet with all this petty persecution there were consolations. One
day two visiting priests stopped in to speak encouragingly to her,
and to ask her to pray for the Holy Father. “Who is the Holy
Father?” One of the priests explained. And every day, from then
on, the children would add three Aves to their Rosary for the
Pope, the successor of Saint Peter. It gave them a glow of im¬
portance to think that they could do something, so far away, to
help the Vicar of Christ. Think of it, the visible head of the
Church! And Francisco! What a comfort he was! He seemed
not only to accept suffering, but to love it, as the saints do who
follow in the footsteps of the Crucified. “Our Lady told us we
would have much to suffer,” he would say. “That doesn’t matter
to me, I will suffer everything as much as she wants!” Or when
Lucia was on the verge of tears, thinking of the ill-treatment she
was receiving at home and abroad, he said, “Never mind! Didn’t
Our Lady say we should have much to suffer?” And Lucia took
heart again.
Another characteristic of the saints that Francisco began to mani¬
fest after the apparition of the Lady was the love of solitude. One
May morning he left the two girls with the sheep, and climbed
to the top of a high rock.
“You can’t come up here!” he called down. “Leave me
alone!”
It was a refreshing sunny day, and Lucia and Jacinta began
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFtqO-HK9YbIWSDnN2lC9Tb4rV7ZR6OJbPxplqEK4dBd56SGWcNvP1BPgyac-E6ANLbriCtIKIX3Fdar9Z0-KBaUd6m84bdeXFC2qvO0CRhoa3II87AKp82BkxAdjBOE4OkJCPYhQ=w507-h822-v0
to run after butterflies. By the time they weaned of this they had
forgotten all about Francisco, and they thought no more of him
until they realized that they were hungry, and that it must be
long past the time for their merenda. There he was, still lying
motionless on the top of the rock. 7
“Francisco! Francisc'd, don’t you want to come down and eat
your lunch?”
“No. You eat.”
“And say the Rosary?”
Later on.
When Lucia called him again, he said, teasingly, “You come
and pray here.”
The girls were not to be outdone. With much scraping of fingers
and bruising of knees they managed to scramble to the top, where,
breathless but triumphant, they demanded, “What have you been
doing all this time?”
“I have been thinking of God, who is so sad because of so
many sins,” the boy answered seriously. “If only I could give
Film joy!”
Some days they forgot the sinners for a little while in the zest
of living with which God has endowed all children. Once they
sang a variation of one of the old spring songs:
“The screech owl sings at night
And tries to frighten me.
As she disrobes the young girl
Sings in the moonlight.
Ah la la!
The nightingale in the field
Sings all day long.
The turtle dove sings in the wood.
Even the cart squeaks a song.
Ah la la!
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFoBuD7km4IzKb9_eTSBHYUwIIOPOCP60GRWSg1f3KMvxRWx5N7939Iv-xnPyY2RDHq_8SjF_a6rkJrF_d1hC6gMoG8W-92WG0DeqltPbQOHOJIhgCjRZymBheyOi_bs0cnnlfoNQ=w491-h810-v0
The Serra is a garden
Smiling all the day,
And drops of dew are gleaming
On the mountains.
Ah la la!”
It all sounded so good that they did it a second time. Then
Francisco remembered.
“We shouldn’t sing that any more,” he said. “Since we saw
the Angel and Our Lady I don’t care about singing.”
It was June now, and as the thirteenth drew near, they could
hardly wait to keep their promise to the Lady to return to Cova
da Ina. Maria Rosa welcomed the day also, but for a different
reason. June 13 was the feast of Saint Anthony, the most popular
saint in the country—and why not, when he was born in Lisboa,
and prayed at Coimbra long before he wrought miracles at Padua?
He belonged to Portugal, and certainly to the people of Fatima,
whose church was, named for him. On his feast day there would
always be a Missa Cantata, a fervent sermon and a colorful pro¬
cession, besides music, fire-works and feasting. And because alms¬
giving had been so dear to the Saint, there would be a generous
distribution of what is called “Saint Anthony’s bread.” Special
fine white loaves, much better than the dark ones that most people
on the Serra have throughout the year, were baked for the poor.
These were stacked upon ox-carts and sundry conveyances loaned
by the most prosperous farmers and other householders, and gaudily
decorated for the occasion with flowers, flags and bright-colored
patchwork counterpanes. When the festive wagons, with their loads,
had arrived at the church, they were lined up in the adjacent open
lot behind a barrier of stakes in which there were two apertures.
Through one of these the poor and the children passed to get their
bread; through the other they departed in orderly fashion. Nobody
went away empty-handed.
Maria Rosa knew how much her youngest daughter loved those
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGne2A-LdaXwLM-dp_H3zDRiEu3FyYF7nWCDb2TnxdfPIPETX-K5jHrPAJT-tjVJn9pgIIqJx9TJOs1KWM9bO1PaFNVO4NqPo4Puti8K6yo1-3whzvPe7v_C_hZxR1BsZchuP_6=w491-h810-v0
» ■/
fresh white loaves, the gaiety of the fiesta, the colors, the music,
the fire-works. What a blessing that this year it would come on
the very day when the little fools were planning to carry on more
of their nonsense at Cova da Ina! She knew Lucia, and she and
her older daughters were confident that Saint Anthony would
restore her to the sanity of truth and obedience. All that June 12
they enlarged, for her benefit, upon the attractions of the next day.
Lucia said nothing. When they pressed her for an answer, she
replied firmly, “I am going tomorrow to Cova da Iria. That’s what
the Lady wants.” But her elders doubted this. “We’ll see if you’ll
leave the feast to go to talk with that Lady!” said Maria Rosa
disdainfully.
Ti Olimpia was inclined to agree with her sister-in-law. She
could hardly believe, from past experience, that Jacinta and Fran¬
cisco would forego all the fun at the church for an imaginary Lady.
But she did not allow herself to be upset about the matter. Her
husband found himself in a more embarrassing position when his
little daughter begged him to go along to Cova da Ina. He did
not wish to expose himself to ridicule on the one hand, or to
offend his children on the other. Happily he remembered that
there was to be a fair in a near-by village next day, and that he
had to buy a couple of oxen. So he must miss both the feast and
the apparition. Well, well! There was no doubt that Ti Marto’s
duty was to look after the stocking of his farm. This solution
pleased his Olimpia also, and she decided to go with him.
Maria Rosa was made of no such flexible stuff. She did all in her
power to discourage Lucia from returning to Cova da Ina. Doubt¬
less she would have employed stronger measures if she had not
happened to talk the matter over with the new pdroco, Father
Manuel Marques Ferreira.
“Let them go if they persist:,” he advised, prudently, “and see
what! happens. Then bring them to me and I will question them.
We’ll get to the bottom of this yet!”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGpUKAFFtRonF_KNWrkixtzwV7Bdqd0QDYCgPsAgVWjrtZfpfAsjN7iaRDmuPTYnF_2WJTK9NPqd7VgrDk7oT8kftYyK5ShMQVZtTaZ9xOEagi6Q3ENFToZQ8WAHmAUYfROaweG5A=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER VII
On the Feast of Saint Anthony the shepherds of Aljustrel take
their sheep to graze much earlier than on other days, and bring
them back to the inclosure at about nine o’clock, in good time to
attend the Missa Cantata at ten. Lucia had her flock out of the
corral before the sun had begun to redden the rim of the eastern
ridge. She had probably been out in the meadows a good while,
perhaps munching a piece of bread (for so the shepherd children
generally eat, instead of sitting at a table) when her brother
Antonio came running across the fields to tell her that there were
several people at the house, looking for her.
Leaving the boy in charge of the sheep, she hurried home and
found men and women from various places far and near—from
Minde near Tomar, from Carrascos, from Boleiros. For the story
of the May apparition had somehow spread all over the moun¬
tains. Many believed it; others were merely curious to see what
would happen; and quite a number had taken the trouble to get
up before dawn and walk over the hills to accompany the children
to Cova da Ina. Lucia was not at all pleased. But she told her
visitors that if they would wait until she returned from eight-o’clock
Mass, they might follow her if they chose. Then she departed for
Fatima.
They waited patiently for some two hours or more under the
fig trees near the house. Naturally their presence was not very
agreeable to Maria Rosa and her eldest daughters, and many acid
comments were passed about the whole proceeding in general, and
their folly in particular. This did not discourage the pilgrims. They
waited, looked around, laughed, talked quietly until Lucia returned
from Mass.
It was about eleven o’clock when the child finally left home,
66
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHX-klYhlNvc8lm9y-gY7KeTj3wm9MtSRK23kzBXj0u-oOf-b_Ch7HS3_GAnCTyqCWnpNykpzR2NjZtmsiJ2Q5qWS2hxu-8u5wHyn7_w8M6702nLr7kG03R_t4V7pKfqphIaN_uXg=w491-h810-v0
with