 pray and weep alone.
Sometimes Francisco and Jacinta would join her there, and add
their tears and prayers to hers. It is doubtful whether they knew
all that went on in the Abobora family. Yet they must have heard
enough to feel sure that something was very wrong, and their
generous hearts reached out in compassion to Lucia’s. Even Jacinta,
young though she might be, was beginning to grasp the meaning
of the mystery of suffering, and often she would say:
“My God, we offer you all these sufferings and sacrifices! It is
an act of reparation for the conversion of sinners.”
They were more silent and sombre than they used to be, these
little shepherds, when they followed their flocks over the gorse
and stubble of the Serra in the spring of 1917. Sometimes, to be
sure, they would hear a familiar music played or sung by other
children in a near-by field, and almost involuntarily would begin
to dance, or to fling upon the fresh April wind the old refrain:
“At trai-lari, lai-lai
Trai-lari lai lai
Lai lai lai!”
But something had gone out of the joy of such singing. In the
words of the old spring song, the ah la la was all over. How
could anyone see what they had seen, and be the same?
There was something different in the air that spring. It was
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFUbSnveKoKAn9zu-AMzaBNKM9JrqBlb7vnXs6-wNAz8y7JdHdOpV1L1RMVhqb2-Afmm3LmRtTQEYrLB8Dn176-Soswv0a9av2Mdy0gRQXkYgE3MkgWcvSfvwSf8w_kCoVJoPXK=w491-h810-v0
like the odor of death hovering upon the fragrance of the new
flowers. Nearly everybody was depressed. Maria Rosa was desolate
when Manuel went away. One of Jacinta’s brothers also had gone
to war, and was said to have been killed. Fortunately the rumor
proved to be false; but Ti Marto and his family had many days
of torment and suspense. One day, when Jacinta and Francisco
were weeping at the thought of their brother’s death, Lucia pro¬
posed a dance to divert their minds; and the little ones began
to dance, still wiping the tears from their faces. Yet they were
often silent, all three, as they roamed over the scattered stones
at Valinhos or gazed across the valley from the cave at Cabego.
They had become aware at last of a world in anguish, a humanity
shackled for some obscure reason to the mystery of suffering.
Even May, the month of Mary, the month of new life and
joy, weighed heavily on the world that year. On May 5, as if to
voice the universal sadness and to point out the only source of
hope, Pope Benedict XV lamented, in a memorable letter, “the
cruel war, the suicide of Europe.” After begging God to turn
the hearts of rulers toward peace, and urging all to purge them¬
selves of sin and pray for peace, he especially asked that since all
graces were dispensed “by the hands of the most holy Virgin,
We wish the petitions of her most afflicted children to be directed
with lively confidence, more than ever in this awful hour, to the
great Mother of God.” Ffe directed that the invocation “Queen
of peace, pray for us,” be added to, the Litany of Loreto, and
continued:
“To Mary, then, who is the Mother of Mercy and omnipotent
by grace, let loving and devout appeal go up from every corner
of the earth—from noble temples and tiniest chapels, from royal
palaces and mansions of the rich as from the poorest hut—from
every place wherein a faithful soul finds shelter—-from blood-
drenched plains and seas. Let it bear to her the anguished cry of
mothers and wives, the wailing of innocent little ones, the sighs
of every generous heart: that her most tender and benign solicitude
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE3Qry6iBLeeu_rm3UtIWdqv7_qh2aXgN75gEc7DXD8dDW6V6tKrnu3HOsuAUfPI-YVJ7IOYmJecP3Nrqw5NhE8UpcfMyh6UPUaxCiFShcNJUVdHbK-dIb4LZutfU4o67ycZ5qeDA=w491-h810-v0
51
Our Lady of Fatima
may be moved and the peace we ask for be obtained for our
agitated world.”
It is quite improbable that Lucia and her cousins had even heard
of the Pope’s letter (for it was still unpublished) when diey went
out to the Serra five days later, the thirteenth of May, 1917. It
was an uncommonly fine Sunday, and Pi Marto had hitched up
his cart, early in the morning, to drive his wife Olimpia to Batalha,
where they could hear Mass at the exquisite cathedral, and after¬
wards do some shopping in the near-by Sunday markets—what
they wanted in particular was a young pig to raise for slaughter
in the fall. So off they went, cheerily enough, leaving the children
to attend Mass at Fatima. It was drawing toward noon when
Jacinta and Francisco got their sheep out of the patio and on the
road to the Lagoa, where as usual they met Lucia with her flock.
They all-proceeded across the fields to the meadows that Antonio
Abobora owned at Cova da Iria. Never was the immense sky
more blue, the land more dappled with pastel colors.
Soon after they arrived at the hill north of the depression called
the Cova and had got the sheep contentedly cropping the furze,
they decided to make a little thicket into a “house” by closing up
the opening to it with a wall; and they began to lug some of the
stones that were lying all about, and to set them one upon another.
While absorbed in this labor they were startled by a flash so bril¬
liant that they took it to be lightning. Without stopping to ask
how it could have come from that cloudless sky, they all dropped
their stones and ran helter-skelter down the slope toward a certain
holm-oak, or carrasqueira, about a hundred yards or more south¬
west of where they had been playing. They had just found shelter
under its thick wide-spreading foliage when there was a second
flash of light. Again frightened, the children left the tree and
darted toward the east, a distance of perhaps another hundred
yards. Then they stopped in amazement. For just before them,
on top of a small evergreen called the azinbeira—it was about
three feet high, and its glossy leaves had prickles on them, like
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFIhEJdCu_Qh7KMZTmwnUxzg4Pk7sgccF9p8qdv9B_-nsyu6RdIV2HCQlpop0pBxKul1PJzdLeig-67HYBeHzO8VVmpGWUbBaNN4--8CPYqmWNXb-kzTuzIriA6Xshdrem-zC48PQ=w491-h810-v0
a
52 Our Lady of Fatima
cactus—they saw a ball of light. And in the center of it stood
As Lucia describes her, she was “a Lady all of white, more
brilliant than the sun dispensing light, clearer and more intense
than a crystal cup full of crystalline water penetrated by the rays
of the most glaring sun.” Her face was indescribably beautiful,
“not sad, not happy, but serious”—perhaps somewhat reproachful,
though benign; her hands together as in prayer at her breast,
pointing up, with Rosary beads hanging down between the fingers
of the right hand. Even her garments seemed made solely of the
same white light; a simple tunic falling to her feet, and over it
a mantle from her head to the same length, its edge made of a
fiercer light that seemed to glitter like gold. Neither the hair nor
the ears could be seen. The features? It was almost impossible to
look steadily at the face; it dazzled, and hurt the eyes, and made
one blink or look away.
The children stood, fascinated, within the radiance that sur¬
rounded her for a distance of perhaps a meter and a half.
“Don’t be afraid,” she said, in a low musical voice, never to be
forgotten. “I won’t hurt you!”
They felt no fear now, in fact, but only a great joy and peace.
It was the “lightning,” really, that had frightened them before.
Lucia was self-possessed enough to ask a question:
“Where does Your Excellency come from?” The child used
the colloquialism of the Serra: “De onde e Vocemece?”
“I am from heaven.”
“And what is it you want of me?”
“I come to ask you to come here for six months in succession,
on the thirteenth day at this same hour. Then I will tell you who
I am, and what I want. And afterwards I will return here a seventh
time.”
“And shall I go to heaven too?”
“Yes, you will.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEDjKkUsGQdBInKUAwFFBnt4Rqyf-D9j9CIYFpe_FzOQzWMJJkNO0QGafHA9OF12Tir15Igz8br6cVuxx3NQP0ImsvaqsL0Un7ko2YU7ZXvwvFOx7b1Vw3psHQjGyuQyadHbggDpQ=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 53
“And Jacinta?”
“Also.”
“And Francisco?”
“Also. But he will have to say many Rosaries!”
Heaven! Lucia suddenly remembered two girls who had died
recently. They were friends of her family, and used to go to her
house to learn weaving from her sister Maria.
“Is Maria da Neves now in heaven?” she asked.
“Yes, she is.”
“And Amelia?”
“She will be in purgatory until the end of the world.”
Purgatory! The end of the world!
The Lady was speaking again:
“Do you wish to offer yourselves to God, to endure all the
suffering that He may please to send you, as an act of repara¬
tion for the sins by which Fie is offended, and to ask for the
conversion of sinners?”
“Yes, we do.”
“Then you will have much to suffer. But the grace of God will
be your comfort.”
As she spoke the words, “a graga de Deus,” the Lady opened
her lovely hands, and from the palms came two streams of light
so intense that it not only enveloped the children with its radiance,
but seemed to penetrate their breasts and to reach the most inti¬
mate parts of their hearts and souls, “making us see ourselves in
God”—these are Lucia’s words—“more clearly in that light than
in the best of mirrors.” An irresistible impulse forced them to
their knees and made them say, fervently:
“O most holy Trinity, I adore You! My God, my God, I love
You in the Most Blessed Sacrament!”
The Lady waited for them to finish this. Then she said, “Say
the Rosary'every day, to obtain peace for the world, and the end
of the war.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGCcVV-JFzhgY7GwYROj9yQTpB1eWPjSgBAVmgow5z5GrHGLc5f5zDI0M8bUA8ICiBgYVho8ug9g6jkC_rKtqK-ifdHpTCB7WKY8IMaIVXb_4vc6SubKBbW7euQ5LXRwiiYh1lZAA=w491-h810-v0
54 Our Lady of Fatima
Immediately after this she began to rise serenely from the azin-
heira and to glide away toward the east “until she disappeared in
the immensity of the distance.” 1
The children remained staring at the eastern sky for a long
time. Even after they began to recover from the state of ecstacy
which had come over them, they remained silent and pensive for
a good part of the afternoon. But they werb not heavy and tired
as they had been after seeing the Angel of Peace. The sight of
the Lady, on the contrary, had given them a delightful sense of
“peace and expansive joy,” of lightness and of freedom; they felt
almost as if they could fly like birds. Jacinta would say from
time to time:
“Ai, que Senhora tao bonita! Oh, such a pretty Lady!”
After a while they began to talk so freely that Lucia felt it
necessary to caution them not to tell anybody, even their mother,
what they had seen and heard. Francisco, as a matter of fact, had
seen the Lady but had not heard what she said, as when he saw
the Angel. When they told him all her words, he was intensely
happy, especially over the promise that he was going to heaven.
Folding his hands over his head, he cried:
“O my Our Lady, I will say all the Rosaries you want!”
“Ai, que Senhora tao bonita!” said Jacinta again.
“Well, I’m going to see if you tell anybody this time,” remarked
Lucia skeptically.
“I won’t tell, no, don’t worry!” answered the little girl. And
Francisco also promised not to tell a soul.
Lucia still had her doubts about Jacinta. The child’s face was
shining with joy. She was almost bursting with it.
1 This is Lucia’s phrase, at the end of her account in her Memoir IV, pp. 35, 36;
1941. It is an interesting coincidence that Monsignor Eugenio Pacelli was being
consecrated Bishop at the Sistine Chapel in Rome on May 13, 1917, the very day
when the children first saw the Lady of Fatima. As Pope Pius XII he took the
first step to carry out the Lady’s wishes in 1942.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEuwcRV1pefbksKUBP90VJpcBrK8HKVPnYcLMfqyMv0VmVY3uHWhT6EPHB0EUIvQZgHmAwBHzCDnmTVkWylyYlIiRahUQNmwEmuSSQqrKGnO25Xcljyg0Nur2JQgzpfS7sc6EuK=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER VI
When Jacinta and Francisco arrived home, they found the small
house alive with people and conversation. All the family, except
the boy in the army, were at home that Sunday; and an uncle
by marriage, Antonio da Silva, had dropped in for supper. As
the daylight began to wane, the older girls had placed a great
kettle of cabbage and potato soup on the hearth fire, and were
bringing loaves of tough brown bread out of a chest, when the
noise of a mule cart on the cobbles outside gave notice that their
parents had returned from Batalha.
Perhaps Jacinta meant only to welcome her mother when she
ran into the street and saw her standing looking at the wagon,
from which Ti Marto was extricating, with some difficulty but
with his usual skill and quiet determination, a young, struggling
and slippery pig. But at the sight of Olimpia’s kindly and ready
smile, the child ran to clasp her about the knees. And then out
it came. The temptation was too much.
“Mother, I saw Our Lady today at Cova da Ina!’’
Olimpia chuckled. “I believe you, child! Oh, yes, you are such
a good saint that you see Our Lady!” And she swept by into
the house.
“But I saw her,” insisted Jacinta, following. And rapidly she
told her everything almost in a breath: how they saw the light¬
ning, and how they feared and fled, and how Francisco asked
Lucia if he should throw a stone at the ball of light, and Lucia
said no; and what the Lady looked like and what she said. And
they must say the Rosary every day, and they were both going
to heaven! Think of it, heaven!
Olimpia saw that it was not a joke; yet how could she take it
55
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEuKcmK-XGfFkQRjOHnYlTWIpK-2D6TQm6udtyLoJU7rgoISGXbwEwiaR9GN_6xI_RiNWAVU_Ep3ZrQQdaIg88-EwJ-mPNCNJslgVBu6TfxPnRIPZ1KWRlLplNhSiafTNNGewbqkw=w491-h810-v0
seriously? “So you saw a Lady! And no one but Our Lady could
appear to you!’’ She bustled around, getting something ready
for the pig to eat, to prepare him for the important part he was
to play in the life of the family that year.1 Meanwhile Ti Marto
had been locking the squealing animal in a shed off the corral,
and had come in, weary enough and rather silent, for his supper.
A moment later he was sitting on the edge of the fireplace, eating
his hot dish of cabbage soup with batatas. Olimpia sat down
beside him. Then, to divert him, she bethought her of the strange
tale she had just had from her youngest daughter.
“O Jacinta! Jacinta, come tell your father what you told me
about the Lady in the Cova da Ina.”
Jacinta lost no time in repeating her story. Her dark eyes were
brilliant, her cheeks flushed. It was evident that whatever may
have happened, the child was deeply excited.
Ti Marto set down his dish gravely, and asked Francisco what
he had to say about all this.
It is not clear just what the boy said; but apparently it was
enough to confirm his sister’s story.
Ti Marto looked from one to the other, slowly trying to make
sense of it all. Olimpia still refused to take any of it seriously. “A
fine little saint indeed,” she repeated, “that Our Lady should
appear to her!” Perhaps there was some humility in her skepticism.
She and her brother Antonio Abobora came from a rather wild
family, more noted for charm and gaiety than for sanctity; even
to this day she gives the impression of being a bit bewildered by
what happened to her children.
“Well, if the youngsters did see a lady dressed in white,” put
in Antonio da Silva slowly, “who could it be but Our Lady?”
The mind of Ti Marto moved slowly, but accurately. He had
almost finished weighing and testing the two accounts, and in¬
terpreting the looks and inflections of his children. It was plain
1 Olimpia’s account to Father De Marchi, op. cit., p. 64.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF2VDaSj4PzqRdPvzWuKuxXJFu5dBm8cI6w9l6xU8t9V8S0ZOmj-jBXLXe9W5CBbaGbCgkmOWArQJtqNhpfMNvjMFgDDG5Itb12kkJq40mlfAQfFrN1cC1I9WInHadOnNQ7hcg-rA=w491-h810-v0
to him that they were not playing a prank on him. And as for
lying—“Ai, Jesus!" and this he repeats even to this day, “I always
found Francisco truthful, and Jacinta even more so.” Finally he
gave his decision.
‘‘From the beginning of the world Our Lady has appeared many
times in various ways,” he observed. “If the world is wicked, it
would be much more so but for many such happenings. The
power of God is great. We don’t know what this is, but it will
turn out to be something.” It occurred to him furthermore that
without some intervention of Providence the children could not
have repeated such big and imposing words, for they had had
little or no instruction, even in catechism. Thus Ti Marto with
his shrewd common sense became the first to believe in the story
of Fatima, on that Sunday evening in 1917.
Lucia knew nothing of all this until the next morning. She had
gone to bed happy, without saying a word about the events of
the afternoon, and had finally fallen asleep thinking of the beautiful
Lady all made of white radiance; and the first she knew it was
morning. She awoke early and went out to play under a fig tree
near the house until it was time to take the sheep to pasture.
After some time she saw her sister Maria of the Angels coming
to look for her, and was startled to hear her say, derisively:
“Oh, Lucia! I hear you have seen Our Lady at Cova da Ina!”
The child stared at her in silence.
“Is it true?” demanded Maria.
“Who told you?”
“The neighbors say that Ti Olimpia says Jacinta told her.”
“And I asked her not to tell anyone!” said Lucia, on the verge
of tears.
“Why?”
“Because I don’t know if it was Our Lady. It was a very pretty
little woman.”
“And what did this little woman say to you?”
“That she wanted us to go six months in a row to Cova da
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGftq2SMys2_SxXRr8O9trNV-7C2giOy6LipJSojeAJ-R7DXY01qG-owe20BXlrYe-z7TGf5Q5tlfK3K7aoljDr7PdUsWLwLIL2KwJQJB7IazZTI6cx_qFWrPXAvmB2QnTX6bFkVQ=w491-h810-v0
Iria, and that after that she was going to say who she was and
what she wanted.”
“Didn’t you