 She had
been given a part in something more than an ephemeral rustic
drama. This was obvious from the revelations themselves. Little
Jacinta had seen it, Francisco had known it.
It was implicit in some of the scenes that took place on the
Serra. Men like her brother Antonio and Ti Marto needed no
college degrees to be able to predict that if the tension between
the pilgrims and the skeptical continued, a civil war might well
be the outcome. The more the Government at Lisboa tried to
suppress the devotion, the more fervently the followers of Our
Lady of Fatima resolved to vindicate her honor.
There was a rather remarkable demonstration on the May 13
following the death of Jacinta. That was the day when the famous
statue was set up in the shrine. A certain man had gone to Cova da
Iria a year or two before with scorn instead of love in his heart.
One story has it that he had a bomb in his pocket, with which
he intended to destroy the chapel in the presence of all the crowd,
but on putting in his hand he found a rosary instead. A more
probable version is that his sister had left the rosary there for his
unbelieving hand to encounter at the right moment. At all events,
he was touched by grace and returned to the practice of his Faith;
and out of gratitude he promised to have a statue made for the
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF_xm1Y7I202ki_kN1dMHk9ouh-omF5DbPPbhlQRLdU3Hr-e8lFtCoQsip2EJKaIOnSXNgpeRVpLdKe-1cgd4_bbanDG9NgzAMAhf3MuYQAk1vEEG7nxX9D2MfOFS8SI1i7LXKNOA=w491-h810-v0
chapel. He went to great pains to ascertain from Lucia just how
Our Lady had looked, and spared no expense to make the work
accurate and beautiful. Whatever might be said of it as art, it
had the power, especially in profile, to suggest something infinitely
pure, simple and spiritual; it could awaken an almost fanatical
devotion in the breasts of many who knelt before it or followed
it in procession; and there were scenes of delirious joy when it
'was first set in its place of honor on May 13, 1920.
That was precisely the day when the Government, resolving to
temporize no longer with an invasion of mysticism, had sent a
couple of regiments of the regular army to Cova da Iria. When
the pilgrims began to arrive they found rifles and bayonets hedging
the scene of the apparitions. Undaunted by this, they formed a still
larger cordon of the barefoot and the humble all about the men
in uniform, and proceeded to recite the Rosary and sing Our Lady’s
songs with such passion that before long the guards themselves
commenced to take part, as Roman legionaries used to join the
unarmed Christians in the arenas. Soon their ranks were broken
and they were on their knees with the others about the azinheira
and the chapel when the new statue was borne tenderly and
triumphantly to the place prepared for it, the place where it has
been honored, with some interruptions, to this day. At one period
of the persecution Maria Carreira used to keep it in her house, for
fear of desecration, except on the days of pilgrimage. Once it was
taken to Lisboa, where it was welcomed by the people with an
enthusiasm to which some attribute the escape of the city thus far
from the doom that Jacinta had foreseen.
Certainly all Portugal was in a sad plight morally, politically
and economically in 1920. In the sixteen years following the
Revolution of 1910 there were sixteen bloody revolutions and
forty-three changes of ministry at Lisboa. The men who fomented
and perpetuated that chaos were part of a revolt against Christianity
which modern Popes have traced to the upheaval of the sixteenth
century and even farther back, and which continues every year
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF4FFIA0HBIAooMAQaqn7O_DwjwDuGioapIHbk80GcyQn_kDUubu2vzwQfymhZ625ASfCScZynYxvkhhWgFBPnM1d6BmXsQIRrbMyGqCfBb8GezNeVcfPhRNiuRnr3h4P0L2aBZXQ=w491-h810-v0
to pursue its goal of world domination. Pope Benedict XV saw
plainly from the watchtower of Saint Peter by the Tiber a great
deal of what has since occurred. “Morals are much more depraved
and corrupt than formerly,” he lamented in 1920. “The fond hope
and wish of every renegade is the speedy rise of some universal
state which is based on the complete equality of men and women
and common ownership of property as a fundamental principle, in
which neither any distinctions of nationality nor authority of parents
over children, nor of public authority over citizens, nor of God over
man living in society, is acknowledged. If these principles are
put into practice, dreadful horrors must necessarily follow.” 1 A
few days later, appealing for help for the new Polish state against
the mysterious Soviet power that had seized control of Russia
only a few weeks after the last apparition at Cova da Iria, he
made another prophetic observation: “Not only is the national
existence of Poland in danger, but all Europe is threatened by the
horrors of fresh wars.” 2
Revolutions are noisy, but God works quietly and patiently. On
August 5, 1920, the very day when Benedict spoke these words,
something occurred which was to have profound effects upon
Portugal, the Fatima devotion, and especially the life of Lucia
Abobora. A bishop was consecrated as head of a new diocese of
Leiria (including Cova da Iria, Aljustrel and all the rest of the
Serra) which the Holy Father had made independent. of the
Patriarchate of Lisboa.
Dom Jose Alves Correira da Silva was a professor at the Seminary
of Porto when Pope Benedict selected him for this important post.
Born near Braga in 1877, he was of medium height, dark and
rather corpulent. His face, like so many in northern Portugal, was
more Celtic than Latin, and concealed, under an habitual expres¬
sion of benignity, certain traces of suffering that were evident only
to those who knew his history. Dom Jose had endured more than
1 Motu Propio, Bonutn Sane, July 25, 1920.
2 Letter, Con Vivo Compiacimento, August 5, 1920.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGLfNYebIGaGkHECH1CkKxNVtlvWddGAlM0NqswCbeqE77FPP03uLZtpCnTBjb1QOw96PyJUqseLqIxWLLJeyu1QNd1gD0YMsG27Z03g3x6XPpYMHsBMCYBzgTwFGeSURDxAPZH=w491-h810-v0
ordinary persecution under the Republic of iqio.ijbragged from
his rectory and thrown into prison, he had been tortured by being
made to stand in icy water day and night, with the result that
he became permanently lame, and walks with great difficulty.
This cross he cheerfully accepted. He had an especial devotion to
the Mother of Sorrows, and had made six pilgrimages to her
shrine at Lourdes, where, after his release, he had begged her,
with other Portuguese refugees, to have mercy on his country.
Later he had returned to give lectures at Porto, where his intelli¬
gence, his gracious and charming manners and his gift for friendship
endeared him to students and fellow teachers, while his sound and
scholarly articles in the Catholic press made him favorably known
as far away as Rome.
One of the first acts of the new bishop when he arrived in the
ancient city of Saint Isabel was the formal consecration of his
diocese, on the feast of the Assumption, 1920, to the Mother of
God. And if ever there was a man who needed her help, it was
he. Ten years of persecution, following other years of complacency
and indifference, had left the Church in a bad way, especially in
the cities. Many clergy were still dispossessed, scattered, exiled,
without incomes. The new diocese had no funds for building and
other expenses. Through ignorance and neglect large numbers of
people had given up Mass and the sacraments. Even the old
episcopal residence, next to the Cathedral of Leiria, was being
used for barracks and government offices, and the new bishop had
to find quarters in a house at an inconvenient distance.
As if there were not enough problems already, there was this
vexing affair of Fatima. Not long after his consecration, Dom Jose
was presented with the 337,000 reis collected by Maria Carreira,
with the request that he dispose of it as he might see fit. About
the same time there came a delegate from the Patriarchate at Lisboa,
who delivered to him the whole dossier of the case. It was now
his problem. The Cardinal Patriarch was no doubt very glad to
be rid of it.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHTmmmhERZlKPgWHp2JbGJhxIjDuxFhW5sOkR1xZkdRlyPWvcMw1im4KyzQWKX_X4EOyBLaYWOIANcJYb20XEGbx8P6GSHtHcnA8mfWkKm5pgDGp-thcPOBuY28iPL0Jh7K-D7e-Q=w491-h810-v0
Dom Jose saw that it was necessary to proceed cautiously. He
had letters from enthusiasts demanding that he recognize the
devotion at once and proceed to build a sumptuous shrine. Yet
there were others from persons worthy of respect, including priests,
denouncing the whole affair as a delusion or a deceit, and arguing
that it gave the enemies of the Chuch one more weapon to use
against her when she sorely needed a period of quiet in which
to repair the ravages of the persecution. It was not easy for a
newcomer to decide. Whatever course he took he was bound to
give offense. It is likely, however, that such a man as Dom Jose
would have acted promptly if he had been able to make up his
own mind. But what was he to think? Two of the chief witnesses
were dead. Lucia always made a bad first impression on anyone
who met her, nor did she ever try to be ingratiating. When all
was said, the story was strange and appeared to be improbable.
One thing seemed evident: something had to be done about
Lucia Abobora, the sole center of the controversy and the sole
witness since the death of Jacinta. There was no doubt that such
a girl, almost untaught, stood in danger from the possible violence
of sectaries who decried the apparitions and from the certain flattery
of devotees inclined to canonize her. It seemed best to have her
leave the Serra for a considerable period. If the affair of Fatima
had been due to any delusion or deceit on her part, her absence
ought gradually to put an end to it. If, on the other hand, the
story was true, devotion would doubtless continue, and a just
decision could be made. After further inquiries and much reflection,
and more than one conversation with Lucia and other members
of her family, the Bishop asked Maria Rosa to visit him and to
bring her daughter on the feast of Saint Anthony, June 13, 1921.
When they had chatted for a while, Dom Jose asked the child
how she would like to leave Aljustrel and attend a good school.
Lucia looked pleased. To be rid of all the questions and con¬
troversies, to be able to forget her grief and loneliness in new
surroundings, to learn to read and write well, to travel—why not?
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHa8N0XoNU9FC4MMISi-23wMJnMg6KGyvUxAYbkZSHsp0XdqXjtKZMJToqaYuTINR_c0uwgewXDHP67MaWa5slsvJpXTVAvTfqdTwKF7SRkzUOLlNtBbJgedHYqMitxPUIH7Yep_Q=w491-h810-v0
Maria Rosa was even more favorably impressed. The continual
strain of having such a daughter, even after the proof of the
apparitions, had been almost more than she could bear. She was
always wondering what was going to happen next. Her hearty
acquiescence, so unflattering to her daughter, may have startled
His Lordship a little, but it also pleased him. He said that Lucia
could enter a school of the Sisters of Saint Dorothy near Porto,
and that she had better leave in a few days.
“Yes, Senbor Bispo.”
“And you will tell no one where you are going,” he added in
his quiet voice.
“Yes, Senbor Bispo.”
“In the school where you are going you will tell no one who
you are.”
“Yes, Senbor Bispo.”
“You will say nothing more to anyone about the apparitions of
Fatima.”
“Yes, Senbor Bispo.”
On the way back to Aljustrel, Lucia and her mother passed
groups of people returning from the pilgrimage at Cova da Iria
singing, “Ave, Ave, Ave Maria!”
Her few preparations were soon made, and she spent her last
day, June 18, in a series of farewell visits. She climbed the slope
of Cabejo for a last look at the valley, where she had first seen
the Angel; and going to the cave, she prostrated herself on the
ground beside the rock where he had knelt, and said the prayers
he had taught her:
“O my God, I believe, I adore, I hope and I love You. . . .
“Most Holy Trinity, Father, Son, Holy Spirit, I adore You
profoundly. . . .”
Lucia climbed over the rocks and went down the other slope
to Valinhos. There at the break of the wall under the olive trees
was what was left of the azinheira where she had seen Our Lady
on August 19, 1917. Pious hands had raised a circle of field stones
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGOQ0TrZwUB4SmqMOui-mbG8pMWAU28C9ReX1ELSxjD0gIdtKlWEQoFfLF-a_tvAa1Yo14vOIPfKRLhHIoeq2Vc3QUpPvGBZiIhrMHdQkjzN8AARpjLkHxB-SBQFVDREp_JE4xzrQ=w491-h810-v0
around it, to the height of about two feet. Usually there are some
daisies there, left by children, and sometimes a vinten or two.
Lucia knelt and poured out her grief and her love. It was not easy
to leave these places! It would not have been easy even if she had
had no memories but those of her games and conversations with
Francisco and Jacinta.
“You will have much to suffer. But the grace of God will be
your comfort. . . .”
She went down the road between the high walls to the Lagoa.
Perhaps there were women washing there, men watering cattle
on the other side; but Lucia saw Francisco and Jacinta, bending over
to drink the brackish water of the barretro. How many times they
met there on their way to the Serra!
There was no one else at Cova da Iria, and she knelt alone by
the plucked tree. Here five times she had seen the Mother of
God; here too she had seen Christ and Saint Joseph. Yet except
for the meagre chapel it was still almost a wilderness of undulating
moors, too far and inaccessible ever to be of much interest to
civilized communities. The heat was withering, the sky a vast
glare of blue. How huge and uninhabited the world could be!
“I am the Lady of the Rosary. . . . Do you suffer a great deal?
Don’t be discouraged. I will never forsake you.”
On the way home Lucia stopped at Fatima to say a last prayer
in Saint Anthony’s Church, where she had been baptized, where
she had received her first Communion, where she had spent so
many hours alone with the hidden Christ. She said goodby to
Saint Quiteria, to Saint Anthony. As she left, the bell in the
tower was beginning to ring the Angelus. ‘‘Behold the handmaid
of the Lord: let it be done according to thy word.”
She crossed the road to the cemetery and knelt by the cross that
showed where Francisco lay. The sun was already low in the
west, and the old wall cast a cool shadow on the grave and on
the kneeling girl.
‘‘Goodby, Francisco; take care of me in heaven.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQETWU8nL5u-zpFHRlqzH0HP-v7edHGkKtX33CcbE30T0Hu4hnnGjnBgs66tGyzrsZd5LPjxSNWHWNo-UYJ-r15T4VmkghaSW5rpa5KtsLR2k7L5i_yXwfk-aI6E5Jx5XK2LfjgW=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 197
On the way down the street of Aljustrel she stopped to say
goodby to her uncle and aunt. It was a sad moment, for these had
been two terrible years for Ti Marto and Ti Olimpia. Not only
had Francisco and Jacinta left them, but Florinda had died in
1920 and Teresa in 1921. Yes, Jacinta had been right again. Four
children dead in something like twenty-three months! It was a
high price that Olimpia paid to become a strong woman.
After a brief prayer in the room where Francisco had died, Lucia
went home, wiping the tears from her eyes, and found her mother
preparing the supper. They were to start before dawn for Leiria,
said Maria Rosa, for no one must know they were going; besides,
it would be a long journey to Porto. Manuel Carreira was coming
to drive them there with his team.
Lucia slipped out to the well for a last look at the sky through
the leaves of the fig trees. It was a serene and beautiful night,
jeweled with stars. The lamps of the angels, she could hear Jacinta
saying.
Maria Rosa was calling her to supper.
Afterwards she went to the corral, where two or three sheep
remained after the flock had been sold. “Goodby, my little friends,”
she said, patting their woolly heads, and went back to the house.
She remembered the rope girdle that Jacinta had given her before
going to the hospital, and burned it. Now it was time for bed.
Fler mother called her at two o’clock in the morning. Ti Carreira
was already waiting outside with the cart. The moon had risen,
paling the stars and making the Serra wonderfully alive and
mysterious. The lamp of Our Lady, Jacinta had called it. Goodby,
goodby! They were soon on the road leading westward through
Chainca and Santocico to Leiria.
When they came to Cova da Iria Lucia said, “Let us stop here
and say the Rosary.”
The three got out of the cart, and went down to the chapel.
There was an oil lamp burning in it at the feet of the statue.
There they knelt and said theTve decades. “Don’t be discouraged.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFup_rgHf8MjZ09iMt19uG6rpD84BCoj-egI9saTLUBwXmSvMe1MnZY-aJXxieLGvnH_mGn8TQT-uzG6NqKTvJ2iBSqg1THsaijP1jUzqm3EXs_vOYxZ5THhq8UljZ2_mSEMQqtAA=w491-h810-v0
I will never forsake you.” But Lucia wept again as she looked for
the last time at the azinheira, plainly gleaming in the eerie light
of the moon.
It was time to go, for they had a ride of nine hours ahead. By
dawn they were far beyond Batalha, between the pines and the
olive groves. At eleven o’clock they were at Leina, where they
were met by a lady sent by the Bishop.
Three hours later Lucia boarded a train for Alfarelos, thence
to Porto. Maria Rosa watched her depart, the tears coursing down
her heavy cheeks. “Goodby, goodby.” The train started noisily.
Lucia Abobora had disappeared from Fatima and from all the
world she had known. To all appearances the Fatima episode was
ended.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE6y-pUVCvvsghHeD3Er52m5WkXITkGUw7kc765a04gzUiiUnwkme9uZwXjjgB_VK3nB6xZP-A7mzE4bHHeNZqjk72_5S1SkA1SgY5NSTzuqQ78dmIK-_KamVyKzms0vKQ2uJV2Jg=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER XVIII
Mass was being said when Lucia and her guide arrived early
next morning at the Asilo of the Sisters of Saint Dorothy at
Vilar, a suburb of Porto, and she was taken at once to the chapel.
She was glad to be able to receive Holy Communion and to
compose herself a little after a night of travel. The vaulted gothic
roof with its ceiling of blue, spangled with gold stars,