 that Lady told us to do.” And raising his eyes to
heaven, he made his offering: “My Jesus, it is for Your love and
for the conversion of sinners!”
“And for the Holy Father too!” sobbed Jacinta, wiping her
tears. “And in reparation for the sins against the Immaculate
Heart of Mary,” she added almost choking. After that the little
girl kept a brave mien until nightfall, when the darkness made her
think of her mother.
The next morning at ten o’clock the Administrator came to
conduct them to the town hall, where he put them through another
long and tiresome examination. The result was the same as before:
they insisted that they had seen a beautiful Lady, all of white
radiance, and that she had told them a secret. And they refused to
tell this secret even when he threatened them with life imprison¬
ment, torture and death. At noon they were so exhausted that it was
a relief to return to the Administrator’s house, especially when they
discovered that Senhora Santos had prepared a good luncheon for
them; for the Administrator’s wife, like Pilate’s had more
compassion and insight, and seems to have treated the young
prisoners with a great deal of motherly kindness. Her husband, on
the other hand, was resolved not to let them go without obtaining
some sort of confession that would put an end to the unfortunate
epidemic of mysticism they had brought upon the district. He
told them sternly that since good treatment and tolerance had had
no effect, he was going to throw them into jail. And this he
proceeded to do.
The town cadea was not a very fragrant or attractive place. Its
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEqR-re4gXU5Tsobt3N3cR_D9SdsFv4h_6-becH24hdBKR5OMv7eAociO17MRuTatFPjcbvyEBIJMiJAiMKiTA_LmoGa4zk53j_OcNOONRwpNzUVIBNpK1qMow2eGxXXl1aLZ34=w491-h810-v0
cells were dark, acrid with old and disreputable odors, full of harsh
discordant echoes, and shut in by iron bars from the world of free
men. Most of the malefactors, probably pickpockets, cutpurses,
drunkards, brawlers, the riff-raff of the taverns and the marketplace,
were herded together in a common room. Without ceremony the
three children were thrust among them. They shrank away, and
went instinctively toward a barred window at one end of the room.
Jacinta looked out upon the marketplace of Ourem, and burst into
tears.
Lucia put her arms about her. “Why are you crying, Jacinta?”
“Because we are going to die without ever seeing our parents
again. I want to see my mother!”
Francisco said, “If we never see our mother again, patience! Let
us offer it for the conversion of sinners. The worst will be if Our
Lady never comes back any more. That’s what bothers me. But
I am going to offer that, too, for the conversion of sinners.” Yet
even after this brave speech, the boy was tormented from time
to time by the fear that the Lady might never return, and had to
be reassured.
All that Lucia has recorded about the prisoners is that there
were several, and that one of them was a thief, appropriately enough
a sort of good thief in his way. She leaves us to imagine the others:
perhaps one of those mangy beggars, so common in Portugal,
wrapped in layer after layer of filthy rags infested with fleas and
smelling of the red soil on which they had slept so often; perhaps
a drunkard reeking with cheap vinho\ perhaps a pimp, a cutpurse,
even a murderer; lost and forgotten men with bloated unshaven
faces, weak or defiant mouths, heavy sensual or crafty eyes, hopeless
expressions and movements, the rag-tag and bob-tail of the Serra,
the offscounng of Portugal and the world. I wish I had thought to
ask Sister Mary Lucia of the Sorrows to describe these poor fellows.
The contrast they offered to the three innocents with their clean
and spiritual eyes must have been more than accidental. There must
have been something fitting and inevitable about it, like the
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGZnRPtS_epNMhF1in2BfAHOBuc9dYjqf2Caqw40ak4H6FNFutq2AlqSOwFB1zjdXhJaZJcUbRPbaaDWk2uJKgQxEdzCn7SPYZltzAUhzSPQBLmnSDNfe4bDaBjHNCvSwvvrxUmaQ=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima • 113
publicans and wme-bibbers who walked with Christ, the two thieves
with whom He died.
The mere sight of this company was such that whenever the two
girls allowed themselves to think about it they began to weep all
over again. “I want to see my mother! ” moaned Jacinta. “I want my
mother!”
Francisco quieted her, as before, asking, “Then don’t you want to
offer this sacrifice for the conversion of sinners, for the Holy Father,
and in reparation for the sins committed against the Immaculate
Heart of Mary?”
“Yes, I do, I do.”
The boy knelt on the floor, and as the girls followed his example,
he repeated his offering:
“O my Jesus, it is for Your love, for the conversion of sinners,
for the Holy Father, and in reparation for the sins committed
against the Immaculate Heart of Mary!”
Sights and sounds so unfamiliar in that place could hardly fail to
attract attention from the other prisoners, and they began one after
another to gather about the kneeling group. Presently they were
asking questions, good-humored and sympathetic enough; and on
learning who the children were and why they were there, they
offered various bits of consolation and advice.
“The easiest way for you to get out,” said one, “would be to tell
the Administrator the secret, since he wants to know it so much.”
“But the Lady doesn’t want us to tell it!”
“What is it to you whether that Lady likes it or not?”
“I would rather die!” answered Jacinta sharply, and the other two
were of the same mind. 1
“Let us say the Rosary.” The three brought forth their beads.
Jacinta took from around her neck a chain with a medal on which
there was an image of Our Lady. Handing this to a tall prisoner,
she asked him if he would please hang it on a nail high up on the
wall. He did so good-humoredly. All the men watched, with
curiosity and some amusement, as the three knelt on the floor, and
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHrimGYK89ggFWUSaqzXgSP_HIiwYC3aF8IgypArnpbaOdVdVRTW3Ykk4rnbyug8VReK7hFE5SgXoCPmbXZwp9p63cOmpdzlCy74C33PTkcoTDuVLglgea7QYtFET83DRouqlrVCA=w491-h810-v0
114 Our Lady of Fatima
earnestly fixing their dark eyes upon the medal, began to recite
their Tertyo.
“I believe in God . . . Our Father, Who art in heaven . . . Hail,
Mary, full of grace ...”
The sight of the upturned faces and the sound of their high
voices repeating the words so familiar in Portugal was more than
hardened reprobates could resist, and presently some of the men were
on their knees joining in the responses, while even those who
remained standing were mumbling phrases that they had not
spoken in many years. Francisco paused and said, “When people
pray they can’t keep their hats on.” A poor fellow threw his cbapeu
on the floor; the boy picked it up, laid it on a bench, and went on
with the prayer. What memories of childhood, of decent women
half forgotten, of broken hopes and dreams unrealized must have
passed through some of those unkempt bowed heads that August
afternoon! At the end there was a moment of awkward silence as
all shuffled to their feet. Jacinta went to the barred window and
looked out. She was sobbing again.
“Jacinta!” said Lucia, following her. “Don’t you want to offer
this sacrifice to Our Lord?”
“Yes, but when I remember my mother I can’t help crying.”
This made the prisoners uncomfortable. They had all taken a
great fancy to Jacinta. One of them bethought him of a harmonica
he had concealed somewhere about his person. Drawing it out, no
doubt giving it the preliminary caresses with which harmonica
players warm up their instruments, he pursed his bps and blew his
best. Some of the others began to sing. Soon they were all feeling
very jolly, for music can unlock or close the gates of sorrow.
Jacinta’s eyes were dry now, perhaps they even sparkled a little
with interest when one of the prisoners asked if they knew how to
dance.
“We know how to dance the fandango.”
“And the vira, too!”
Lucia records that “Jacinta was thereupon the partner of a poor
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEZFpdbIBYoquEdrmCtBYQ_XfwdQ0_0-GpAMIumhQ0TMYAsIKA6YalAj2bkdI6L0MG39mL620FYu-hbBBJ6ziVn7-8LHyg6HQ0rf1eAvnN3_89_kO9JvYxxScZWyDnFwBf9KGMG=w491-h810-v0
thief who found her so small that he ended by dancing with her
around his neck.” 1 Soon everyone was in hilarious motion. The
room shook with the shuffling and thumping of hob-nailed boots,
the hoarse singing of /oices off-key, the in-and-out wheezing wail
of the harmonica.
This grotesque scene was interrupted by a noise outside, and the
sudden opening of a door. A policeman entered. “Follow me,” he
said to the three children. They did so, and found themselves
presently in the office of the Senhor Administrator.
Santos made a final demand for the secret. When the only
answer was a defiant silence, he assumed the look of man at the
end of his patience, and said coldly:
“Very well. I have tried to save you. But since you will not
obey the government, you shall be boiled alive in a cauldron of
hot oil.”
Fie shouted a command. A door opened to reveal a guard with
an incredibly horrible leering face; he must have been chosen
for the part he was to play. A conversation something like this
followed:
“Is the oil good and hot?”
“Yes, Senhor Administrator.”
“Boiling?”
‘‘Sim, Senhor.”
‘‘Vamosl Take this one and throw her in.”
He pointed to Jacinta. The guard seized her and carried her
away before she could say a word of farewell.
So it had come at last! Lucia began to pray fervently. Francisco
said an Ave Maria that his sister would have the courage to die
rather than betray the secret. Neither doubted that she was already
in her last agony, and that they too had but a few more minutes
to live. They were resolved to die with her. Death was not
as terrible to them as it would have been to other children.
1 She adds that “Our Lady had compassion on his soul and he was converted.”—
Memoir I, 1936, p. 18.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFV-VFOmm0SmkMYjukIPoMtOSnh5YxFnI9iTIkg9ilquDVKlSwsXRuYVFrVwxEpVXfs4BpLtLcBJj1GTkqLJhOfRhbG1Emp7Lnw3FzL5PNOyRtj0ZSXf7JM6y3p43l5o0RnTQMO6w=w491-h810-v0
“What do we care if they kill us?” murmured Francisco. “We’ll
go right to heaven.”
The door opened and the ugly guard returned. “She’s fried,”
he said with ghoulish satisfaction. “Now for the next one!” >
With that he laid hold of Francisco and dragged him off. Lucia
was left alone with the Administrator.
“It will be you next,” he remarked. “You’d better tell me the
secret, Lucia.”
“I would rather die.”
“Very well. You shall.”
The guard returned, and led her away. He took her through
a corridor, and into another room. And there she saw Jacinta
and Francisco, both unharmed, and speechless with joy and sur¬
prise. For they had been told that she was being fried in oil.
The play was over, the tragedy had turned into a farce.
Santos hated to admit, even then, that three children had
defeated his purpose. He kept them at his house that night, in
the same room as before. Next morning he took them to the
town hall for one more inquisition. When that failed, he admitted
that it was no use, and ordered them sent back to Fatima. It was
Wednesday, August 15, 1917, the feast of the Assumption of
Our Lady.
When'Manuel Pedro Marto and his Olimpia went to Fatima
that morning, they were a sad and harassed couple. During two
nightmarish days and nights they had had no idea where their
two youngest children were. Apparently they believed a rumor
to the effect that the Administrator, after taking them to Ourem,
had secretly transferred them to some place of incarceration at
Santarem, a larger and more anti-clerical center of bigotry; and
this may be why the record reveals no effort on the part of the
courageous Ti Marto to obtain their release. It also sheds no
flattering light upon the state of civil liberties under a Republic
which had expended so much oratory upon the alleged tyranny of
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGuDIl0WWxhWjHb923H68rp6xLuF4_4OEcapOOHq5OUx-GxBJG19RmWd-ccKfknkWis0znwzcrswqsWMvxWO6NFWMB-yclQjWHXQ0decZBHkUziNCUzPfgnHMjV_Yq1pmBkhR25=w491-h810-v0
the decayed monarchy, but had done nothing of importance to
improve the status of the proletariat. Ti Marto did not consider
himself a poor man. He owned property worth from $4,000 to
$5,000 in United States money; this with his labor satisfied his
wants, which were few and simple. Yet he was at a loss how
to proceed against an official who had wronged him in the most
criminal way. Lawyers and litigation, to be sure, are luxuries
that peasants can seldom afford, even when they pride them¬
selves, as he does, on not being paupers. Ti Marto turned in his
humble way to God and asked Him to straighten all this out.
Olimpia said her Rosary. On the feast of the Assumption they
went to Mass as usual.
Everyone at Saint Anthony’s church was talking about the kid¬
napping, but none had any suggestion to make as to getting
the children back, or any information about where they were,
until Ti Marto’s stepson Antonio brought word, after Mass, that
they had been seen at Ourem playing on the veranda of the
Administrator’s house. That was news with a vengeance; but
before he could think about going there, he heard someone else
say they were in Fatima, on the porch of the rectory. And there,
sure enough, they were, with one of the underlings of the Adminis¬
trator. Presently Ti Marto had Jacinta in his arms, his tears falling
on her face. Francisco and Lucia clung to him, asking for his
blessing.
“Well, here are your children,” said the official from Ourem,
as if announcing a great favor.
It was well for him that before Ti Marto could reply, a hulla¬
balloo arose from the churchyard near by, where the people had
lingered to gossip after Mass. The air was full of clenched fists,
clubs, and angry words. Father Ferreira appeared in the side door
of the chuch, very indignant. He had been making his thanks¬
giving after Mass at a prie-dieu before the altar, when the noise
had startled him, and seeing Ti Marto on the rectory porch, he
suspected him of being responsible.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFNaZT2no3D07Z2ZdmNIUAQXsRkNwl5sb6hJPg9dQ4RksxYiq24fQGX7bC2GBlAbj8iJzwok3bcWJ1cW5GmnbbbcwbbXZOkHq7HASkGAQ8C0N9s_LAXQfvioRMmIU8woHA5Ar2JqQ=w491-h810-v0
“Senhor Marto, you are doing me a great injustice here!” he
exclaimed.
The father of Jacinta and Francisco did not know what to reply.
But after the priest had gone back into the church, he addressed
the mob:
“Boys, behave yourselves! Some of you are shouting against
the Prior, some against the Administrator, some against the
Regidor. Nobody is to blame here. The fault is one of unbelief,
and all has been permitted by the power of the One above!”
The Prior, who was listening at the church window, thrust his
head out and cried:
“He speaks very well! Senhor Manuel speaks-very well!”
Just then the Administrator appeared in his wagon, on his way
home (not from Mass, but from the market), and concluding,
as the Prior had, that Ti Marto was inciting the mob to vengeance,
he shouted, “Stop that, Senhor Marto!”
“All1 right, all right! There’s nothing new about it.” Ti Marto
steadily watched his enemy approach. He saw something else
that the Blacksmith had not noticed. Some of the young men
in the crowd had caught sight of him, and armed with clubs and
staves, they were advancing upon him from the rear. Santos
addressed the father -of Jacinta and Francisco almost jovially:
“Senhor Marto, come and have a glass of wine with me!”
“No thank you, much obliged.”
Then, according to Marto’s account, he saw the young fellows
with bludgeons closing in about the Administrator. Something
had to be done at once if bloodshed was to be prevented. Ti Marto
quickly stepped up to the side of Santos and said:
“With regard to your invitation, perhaps I will accept it.”
Agreeably surprised, and wholly unaware of the danger he was
in, the Administrator took his arm, and they crossed the church¬
yard and the highway toward a little wine shop near the gate
of the cemetery.
“You can ask the children if I treated them badly,” began the
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFxVBpOrQr6q86b433E2Pt0MxDoB8ZDpQIWt_F40LR_nOscpoycTGiHGkJfxaVe7N_ldNX4P9r5p2FX77oxFHbx3segJDq2pe3v3gTZFVskSB6oupUqgyoyMYcliGg8f-a3xQak-A=w491-h810-v0
Blacksmith, a little uncomfortable perhaps under the searching
brown eyes of his companion.
“Yes, yes, Senhor Administrator! No doubt about it. The
crowd has more questions to ask about that than I have.”
Santos looked back and saw the young men with their bludgeons,
glaring at him and still undecided whether to attack him or no.
But the intervention of Ti Marto had been effective, and the
Administrator, at the door of the little shop, was already calling
for bread, cheese and wine. He began talking volubly as they
seated themselves at a table. Among other things he tried to
convince his guest that the children had told him the secret.
“Yes, yes!” said the farmer with his slow canny grin. “They
don’t tell their father or their mother, but they tell the Senhor
Administrator! I can well believe it.”
He drank a glass of wine and excused himself. As they left
the shop the Administrator offered him a lift as far as the Post
Office. The people along the roadside were saying, “Ti Marto
said too much and the Blacksmith has arrested him.” 2
Meanwhile Lucia and her cousins, followed by a few curious
stragglers, had gone to the scene of the apparitions, two miles
away (and they did this, as Ti Marto remembers, before they
went home) to say the Rosary before the tree. Poor azinheira! It
had only a few leaves left, for people had been carrying away the
upper foliage and even some of the branches as relics and souvenirs.
Near it stood the table, with two candlesticks and some flowers,
that Maria Carreira had placed there on the thirteenth of August.
The good woman from Moita had little realized what a responsi¬
bility she was taking upon herself. Many small coins had been
cast upon the table; but when it was knocked over during the
confusion over the discovery of the kidnapping, they were scattered
on the ground. Loud voices appraised her of the fact. “Woman,
pick up that money! Keep track of it! See you don’t lose