 visions there is a subjective element, and it may be
that they present different details to different persons.
Dr. Formigao made one more attempt to learn the secret from Francisco.
“Which was brighter, the figure of the Virgin or the sun?”
he asked.
“The figure of the Virgin was brighter.”
“Did you hear what she said?”
“I heard nothing.”
“Who told you the secret? The Lady?”
“No, it was Lucia.”
“Can you tell it to me?”
1 cannot,
“You don’t want to speak, because you are afraid of Lucia, you
are afraid she will strike you, isn’t it true?”
“Oh, no!”
“Then, why can’t you tell it to me? . . . Would it be a sin,
perhaps?”
“I believe that it would be a sin to reveal the secret.”
“Is the secret for the good of your soul, and Lucia’s and
Jacinta’s?”
“Yes.”
“Is it also for the good of the soul of the Senhor Prior?”
“I don’t know.”
“Would the people be sad if they happened to learn it?”
“Yes.”
The children were so pale from fatigue and dazed from excite¬
ment that Dr. Formigao shortened his examination, fearing they
would be ill if they were not given some rest. When he returned
October 19, they were still so exhausted that they answered me¬
chanically, like sleepwalkers. Lucia’s memory was vague on recent
events, though accurate about those in the past. The questioner
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEmMSWx_Z2st30gYpOQoQX7SuQV9G-g5B8e6E29dfCOV_GruBuGQIaXVGfdsEaHBDk9Z_3ejmnwd2_wSdcC3I9x2Vuo8sbc-FQqyk7YJj-cypLEPBdUx1HpLuIj2vEZzVyFg41E=w491-h810-v0
i56 Our Lady of Fatima
was convinced that all three had answered honestly. He had seen
the miracle of the sun. He went away believing also in the appari¬
tions; and from then on he was a defender of the children even
in the face of a persistent persecution, all the more difficult to
understand when the prime movers in it happened to be not
Carbonari or Masons, but fellow Catholics, fellow priests.
As for the liberal opposition, the first stupefied silence of the
Carbonari lasted but a few days. “What are we about?” said the
children of this world on another occasion. “For this Man is
working many miracles. If we let Him go on like this everybody
will believe in Him!” Within a week the Grand Orient lodge of
Santarem had recovered sufficiently to plan not merely a defense
but a counter-attack. On the night of October 23 several of the
brethren, including one known as Cemetery Frank, went to Ourem,
where they were reinforced by certain henchmen of the Adminis¬
trator Santos. All then repaired by automobile to Cova da Ina
with the intention of destroying what remained of the azinheira
tree, and thus killing the cult by robbing it of a rallying point
and chief relic. Some carried lanterns, others axes' and hatchets.
A few strokes close to the roots, and a small tree was lying
flat on the ground. Near by were other paraphernalia of devotion:
the table of Maria Carreira with flowers and coins on it, and a
picture of Our Lady; the rustic arch that pilgrims had built of
two upright poles, with one hanging between to support a couple
of lanterns and some crosses. All these the raiding party confiscated
and carried off to Santarem. They placed them on exhibition as
medieval monstrosities in a house near the seminary, charging
a modest fee to inspect them, and offering the proceeds to the
manager of the Misericordia, who, however, declined. The next
evening they bore the entire exhibit in procession through the
streets, singing blasphemous litanies to the accompaniment of
drums.
The Liberal and Masonic O Seculo of Lisboa published these
and other details, with a hearty condemnation of the whole des-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG6CZUJi1jeS9sZrz_-EbI0dydrGxPg_6p-v7MWnhJrE6MkOA1pFbpwPkoBPH23MRkwVcW7w2pikQ09xf3h2PkNkq_6IOFTumJ-4MkEXU4NiKbMJ0ACNLYjsb2DA5YjBRguitta=w491-h810-v0
l57 Our Lady of Fatima
ecration, remarking that it was especially shameful at a time
when Catholic processions were forbidden. Other anti-clericals were
less tolerant. When a group of educated Catholics of Santarem
published an indignant protest, the Portuguese Federation of Free
Thinkers retorted with one of the most curious documents in Portu¬
guese history, a Manifesto addressed to all liberals against “the
shameful spectacle staged as a ridiculous comedy at Fatima,” which
they ascribed to an ecclesiastical plot to unite Church and State
and restore diplomatic relations with the Vatican. In his fervor
the writer went so far as to declare that miracles ought to be
punished like transgressions against city ordinances, since they
were violations of the laws of nature. He was particularly incensed,
because the miracle of the sun was invented and perpetrated on
the anniversary of the Freethinker Francisco Ferrer. Demanding
prompt public action against all those guilty of dragging such
medievalism into the light of the twentieth century, he concluded
with_L
“Long live the Republic!
Down with reaction!
Long live liberty!”
On the morning of October 24 the news of the ravishing of
the shrine passed rapidly from mouth to mouth through the grape¬
vine of the Serra. There were cries of anger in Moita, in Fatima,
in Aljustrel. Maria Carreira was one of the faithful who hurried
to Cova da Ina to see what had happened. Ai! the worst had
happened. The table, the arch, the lanterns, all had disappeared.
Yet not the worst! For the marauders had chopped down the wrong
tree. And there, a few feet from the uprooted one, stood the brave
little azinheira on which Our Lady had appeared, its upper leaves
sadly shorn, but the trunk and lower branches still standing in
the sun for all to see. Maria Carreira gave thanks to God.
The net result of the outrage was to increase rather than dis-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEwhODDRmgMadg7T36bUWBIxRph-OHYVdUnBM9G5RS7iBgwAuOtmM5Nq_fv7OP8duckaQVwXutV4dPV5oIA1BgoqnoAmAP6dgAV6zUh9hk_5Gs-wHN5sSdyh4nGzhBQOaSNvvgJnQ=w491-h810-v0
158 Our Lady of Fatima
courage the devotion to Our Lady of Fatima. The number of
pilgrims gradually increased. There were sure to be many of them
on Sundays and on the thirteenth of each month from May to
October, sometimes in a veritable procession from Leiria, Ourem,
or Chao de Ma^as. Even during the week it was a rare day that
did not bring at least a few. The barefoot poor still predominated;
many were sick, lame, brokenhearted, all hopeful that if they
could but touch the bark of the azinheira, the Queen of Heaven
would have pity on them. One cold winter morning Maria
Carreira found a man who had slept all night on the ground near
the tree, after walking eleven leagues. “I am glad I came,” he
said. “I feel very happy in this place.”
Along with the devout poor came a few more prosperous persons,
sometimes from as far as Lisboa or Porto. Almost every day one
would appear at the Martos’ or Aboboras’ and ask for a few words
with the children. At first Olimpia used to send out to the meadows
for Jacinta and Francisco, but this got to be such a nuisance that
she finally lost patience, and decided to turn the flock over to her
son Joao. The two were greatly disappointed, for it meant giving
up, in great measure, the company of Lucia. But before long
she too ceased to be a shepherdess.
Maria Rosa and her husband were too human to have been
transformed into angels by the stupefying experience they had
shared on October 13. Miracle or no miracle, Antonio bitterly
resented the fact that the vast crowd had increased, if possible,
the destruction of his farm property in the Cova. Nothing would
ever grow there now, especially with pilgrims coming to camp
out or walk about daily. It was no small sacrifice for a farmer of
Aljustrel to lose fifty sacks or more of potatoes a year, not to
mention his beans, spinach and other vegetables. Maria Rosa
remained irascible to the end, for it was her temperament. But
she was too honest to deny that Lucia had been right, and too
devout, having made the admission, to refuse to do all in her
power to carry out the wishes of the Mother of God. If Our
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH_9FGSNaSmrOBBPun7KCEOV2dTF4LFads_67vFrsnCfscAnoe2xlL5bmp8mawCrf3xbP8cSty_UYMbg8i9-x0sInnZ9GR_iAJDZrZuYITU-T3_m4jYq8fArXj8KpKEllPlGFzB=w491-h810-v0
*59 Our Lady of Fatima ■ • ' ‘ ' I
Lady wanted the cacbopa to learn to read, there was nothing more
to be said. Since the time of the monarchy there had been a small
day school for boys at Fatima, near the church. Recently, by a
happy coincidence, one had been started there for girls. Maria
Rosa entered Lucia, and prevailed upon her sister-in-law to send
Jacinta also.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQElY63JWA9rKMgwf8CnudjgbWDvKKFdZvsPkCTLk3YVc6p6OQnqahJssuOOPJD03rOyiFcIhKspBPiFknc4SO428iirHZT4Zd-88t0lQaGLAADh94v9CuzCyyTloLSZlz_gtj5Y2g=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER XV
Francisco was left alone now, but he was never lonely. He was
never without a calm sense of the presence of God. He never
tired of seeing the rising and the setting of the sun. He could
go with the girls on holidays to say the Rosary at Cova da Iria
or the Angel’s prayer at Cabeco, scampering over walls and
ditches at the first glimpse of anyone who looked like a curious
pilgrim.
Sometimes he was caught before he could escape. One day a
whole group of such persons surprised him, with his sister and
his cousin, at a bend of the road. They at once recognized and
surrounded the three. One set Jacinta on top of a wall, so that all
might see and hear her better. Another tried to do likewise with
Francisco. More nimble, he fled to the top of another old wall
near by, whence, looking back in triumph, he saw a poorly clad
woman and her young son kneeling and holding out their arms
to him in supplication. The mother, begged him to ask Our Fady
to heal her husband, who was ill, and not to let him be sent
to the war. Francisco knelt on top of the wall and began to say
his Rosary. The strangers all joined in.
“Afterwards they accompanied us to Cova da Iria,” wrote Fucia,
“and said another Rosary on the way. The poor woman promised
to return and thank Our Fady. She did, various times, and brought
her husband, who was restored to health. They were of the parish
of San Mamede, and we called them the Casaleiros.” 1
Most strangers bored Francisco. What silly questions! One of
the favorites was the one inflicted on small boys everywhere in
the world: What are you going to be when you grow up? Such a
160
1 Memoir IV, p. 25.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG2BJP82jBUyOYK4bprBtmC2djC4a00wOXPmNVsCMPq-rKZxaQlIBu_Use8RLRLK3Up1ud55xIFn91l5LZLuyj2WUjBwn7nPjbUYmVB-setsPkb6SHKqfQDUQylKHo7HV35DCNMAA=w491-h810-v0
query, for him, entailed too much explanation. There were those
two stuffy senhoras, for example.
“Do you want to be a carpenter?”
“No, ma’am.”
“Ah, you want to be a soldier, then?”
“No, ma’am.”
“A doctor, isn’t that it?”
“Oh, no!”
“I know what you would like to be—a priest!”
“No.”
“What! To say Mass? ... to hear confessions? ... to pray
in the church? Isn’t that it?”
“No, senhora. I don’t want to be a padre.”
“Then what do you want to be?”
“I don’t want to be anything.”
“You don’t want to be anything?!”
“No. I want to die and go to heaven.” 2
Francisco had no ambition to go to school with Jacinta and
Lucia. What was the use, if he was going to heaven so soon?
But he liked to walk with them as far as Saint Anthony’s Church
in Fatima. Then he would say:
“Look, you go to school and I will stay here in the church
near the hidden Jesus. It isn’t worth the trouble for me to learn
to read. I’m leaving here soon for heaven. When you come back,
call me.”
The church was being repaired, and the Sacred Host had been
moved from the main altar to a small one on the left side, near
the entrance. “And there I found him when I returned,” said
Lucia. He used to spend whole days on his knees looking at the
tabernacle where his Lord was waiting for someone to come and
visit Him. It is likely enough that in this way, without direction,
Francisco learned to practice mental prayer. He may well have
2 Another of Ti Marto’s recollections, in De Marchi, p. 211.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF8hIeNwuP6yxJ3otcuClzWIBS3mvcsr3sZMYjN100DWR2Vf4oACRs-tfZrrZkYkgGzs2piNza3IwXdM-GvbQb4lKvg5j4wTJ3tBdNgxgLU2r09ygJ1BjvcK1hhHw4VBWYKvgXACg=w491-h810-v0
become a fairly advanced contemplative, he may possibly have
had ecstacies. He had learned from the Master Himself the lesson
that Saint Teresa teaches in her Way of Perfection: that lofty
prayer demands love, solitude, detachment, freedom from all self-
seeking or sensuality.
Yet he never paraded his piety, but concealed it, even from
Jacinta. One day after school when the girls lost sight of him on
the Serra, they found him lying prostrate and motionless behind
a stone wall.
“Why don’t you come and pray with us?”
“I’d rather pray alone, to think, and to console Our Lord. He
is so sad.”
“Francisco, which do you like better, to console Our Lord or
to convert sinners so that their souls won’t go to hell any more?”
This was a more profound theological question than Lucia may
have realized, but he answered without hesitation:
“I’d rather console Our Lord.”
“Don’t you remember then how sad Our Lady was the last
month when she said not to offend Our Lord, because He was
much offended already?”
“I want to console Our Lord first and then convert the sinners
so that they won’t offend any more.”
One day he was missing so long that Jacinta thought he was
lost. “Francisco! Francisco!” No answer. Finally they discovered
him, prostrate and motionless, behind a pile of rocks. Still no
answer. He hardly stirred even when they shook him, and when
he finally got up, he seemed hardly'to know where he was. He
explained that he had been saying the prayer of the Angel, and
then had remained there thinking.
“And didn’t you hear Jacinta calling you?”
“I? No, I heard nothing.”
Francisco’s prayer was not a form of self-indulgence, like that
of the pseudo-mystics. There was nothing in it of what Saint
John of the Cross calls “spiritual gluttony.” Rather, it flowered
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHXSb6eAvTdGmRKzLxf0_zZy4YDtciXMXG5pwBNkJd2zMqjtXbYakIdnLNDLCYm8N0uNnj_uSd4iH1V5mwAJTtqqkhoDgQ4tiaTacw2e33NUanspbGqzd8xGgTw-OSXhQAohLynHw=w491-h810-v0
radiantly into good works for the benefit of others. He would go
out and gather up the sheep and goats of a certain poor old woman
who had trouble managing them. He obtained notable cures and
conversions. He could never resist any honest appeal. Just as he
had once offered a boy two vintens to release a captive bird, and
had run all the way to Aljustrel and back to fetch the money,
so now he would spare himself no trouble to free some struggling
soul from sin or pain. One day on the way to school Lucia met
her sister Teresa, recently married, who had come from Lomba,
where she now lived, with a request for prayers. The son of a
woman there had been arrested and falsely accused of a grave
crime for which he might be exiled or imprisoned for many years.
After Teresa had passed along to her mother’s house, Lucia told
the others what she had said.' Francisco was visibly moved. When
they reached Fatima he said:
“Look, while you two are at school I will stay with the hidden
Jesus and ask for this grace.”
When school was, over the girls found him kneeling before the
Santissimo. “Did you tell Our Lady about that?” asked Lucia.
“Yes, and you can tell your sister Teresa that the boy will be
home again in a few days.”
So it came to pass; and the woman of Lomba was at Cova da
Iria on the thirteenth of the next month, giving thanks for her
son’s release.
For such favors Francisco paid the price that all the mystics
pay. His great desire, next to heaven, was to receive the hidden
Jesus in Holy Eucharist. This became almost a burning pain
when he saw his sister Jacinta going to her First Communion.
They had begun''preparing for it together the previous summer.
Ti Marto remembers it well; it was soon after the Prior had
questioned them about the apparitions. “Senhor Prior,” he said,
“here are my two children, ready for their first confession. Now
you can ask them all the questions you want!” Afterwards he
took them to be examined for their First Communion, but Father
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHNyFMqWzc7Eo_qn07UNSGIcerS_uxK51OiWRPImG1CU8bu-LTDwC4dmREPHcPZB7OkiGPiVdmEyj-5kHh5kqYUKMyX5nMoOD7sc81eC7aSVMLltw4AqDNCWD87kZXPx_Umvem7mA=w491-h810-v0
Ferreira thought they had better wait another year. Jacinta finally
passed in May, 1918; but Francisco failed again when he became
confused about some point in the Credo. This time he went home
crying. It was hard enough for a boy of ten to fail, but harder
still to sit with the grown-ups on a fragrant spring day and watch
his younger sister go up without him. But the pain of separation
is familiar to the lovers of God, and Francisco bore it bravely
as he bent once more to his prayers. “It is for your love, O my
Jesus!”
It is plain from Lucia’s memoirs that she recognized a certain
spiritual leadership in this boy who was her junior. Just before
Lent in 1918 some of her friends asked her to organize one of the
festas of Carnival Week, leading up to the frivolities of Mardi
Gras. It was the custom for a group of boys and girls to meet at
a certain place, bringing oil, bread or meat from home, and then
to feast and dance till late at night. Jose Carreira and his wife
offered the use of their house for what promised to be the best
party of the year. Girls were coming from Moita, Fatima, Silva
dos Currais, Lomba, Pederneia, Cura da Pedra, Cosa Velha, all
over the Serra. “I refused at first, but, carried away by a cowardly
condescension, I gave in to their insistent demands.” Yet Lucia’s
conscience troubled her, and she told her cousins.
Francisco’s dark eyes looked her sternly through and through.
“And you are going back to these kitchen parties and games?
Flave you forgotten that you promised never to go back to them?”
“I don’t want to go, but you can see that they keep asking
me, and I don’t know what to do.”
“Do you know what you are going to do? All the people
know that Our Lady appeared to you. Just say that for that you
have promised not to dance any more, and so