 cit., p. 244.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGbFJ7qt8ZwpdFUGPxjdPehWE8_D8kW6iC-1pOahPwhPjIFdjtbBd0xB455UistPMu9zP1j5D9o6_tUs079tHlK4WzZiZVPP7CGhYUOubmwmGoDkmA0Ikz38h3wVdH2PCnfIQtr1w=w491-h810-v0
white handkerchief in her right hand, which she fluttered from
time to time, and Jacinta had one in her left hand. These were
the signals agreed upon so that certain ladies, friends of the Baron
of Alvaiazere, might recognize them. But no ladies appeared.
Antonio, who could read, went to make some inquiries. When
he failed to return, his mother feared he was lost, and went about
the station crying, “Antonio! Antonio!”
After what seemed an interminable time Antonio sauntered
back. A moment later three well-dressed ladies introduced them¬
selves as the friends of the Baron.
The first thing to be 'done was to find lodgings for the way¬
farers, for none of the ladies had room for them at home. So they
all went about the city, applying at various houses where there
might be accommodations. Olimpia was tired, Jacinta almost dead
when, after many refusals, a good woman agreed to take them
in. They remained with her for a week.
At the end of that time a place had been found for Jacinta in
the Asilo in the Rua da Estrela, next to the Church of Our Lady
of Miracles. Dona Maria da Punficacao Godinho, the head of
this institution, was a Franciscan nun who went about dressed as
a laywoman—since religious garb was forbidden under the Repub¬
lic-collecting alms with which she managed to house, clothe,
feed and educate from twenty to twenty-five orphan girls. She
had a particular devotion to Our Lady, and having heard of her
appearances at Fatima, was praying to be allowed to go there
and see the children so favored, when someone interrupted to tell
her that Jacinta was in Lisboa. From that moment she took the
child to her motherly heart, made her at home in the orphanage,
and had her sit every day in a sunny window looking out on the
Garden of the Estrela, where there was always something interesting
to see.
Jacinta was happy. She liked living in a convent. It seemed
heavenly to think that the hidden Lord was there all the time, and
that she could visit Him every day and receive Him at Mass
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGKaS_F-ucBrc4QYnXVrqQbCpXuVptVl2kXzFThqdkO5iIm8wkLPCjqKWgKd_k9sY6ZKkOhewRaPM7T3ZjpVuXT4UC8PHzeNNCXKcF4ajlcXB4QnDUepX8lTTydUIUdE5CC6RLJhg=w491-h810-v0
every morning. She could never understand how visitors could
laugh and gossip in the chapel, and she asked Mother Godinho to
remind them to have more respect for the One Who was there.
When the reproof had little effect, she said positively, “Then
the Cardinal will have to be told about it. Our Lady doesn’t want
people to talk in the church.”
Mother Godinho believed that she had a saint under her roof.
“She speaks with such authority!” she said. She noticed that
Jacinta had little to do with the other girls, except now and then
to give one of them some motherly advice on truthfulness or
obedience. Often the nun would sit with her by the window and
draw her into conversation. Afterwards she would write down
some of the more striking things she said.
“Wars,” remarked Jacinta, “are nothing but punishments for
the sins of the world.
“Our Lady can no longer hold up the arm of her beloved Son
over the world. It is necessary to do penance. If people reform,
Our Lord will save the world. But if they do not reform, He is
going to punish it.
“Our Lord is profoundly indignant with the sins and crimes
that are committed in Portugal. For this, a terrible cataclysm of
the social order threatens our country and principally the city of
Lisboa. There will break loose there, as it appears, a civil war of
anarchist or communist character, accompanied by sacks, assassina¬
tions, fires and devastations of all kinds. The capital will be
converted into a veritable image of hell. On the occasion when
the outraged divine justice inflicts so frightful a punishment, all
who can should flee from this city. This punishment now predicted
should be announced little by little and with due discretion.5
“Dear little Our Lady! At! I am so sorry for Our Lady! She
is so sad.
“Pray much, my little mother, for sinners. Pray much for priests.
5 This obviously is the diction of Mother Godinho, though the substance no
doubt was Jacinta’s.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFl7YQuzIniz94QHoGuz4CeG87xjCqIdXNkyVYWXf7g3gQ4g4vPIVIUHYoapx5SXVjZ4qtKXpBsMrjljOUcuTi0s4kYAGAc3gOzQvdU3zFEty_W31bd5xhuOPndsOZ2YSJ9O_FsMA=w491-h810-v0
Pray much for religious. Priests should occupy themselves with
the affairs of the Church. Priests should be pure, very pure. The
disobedience of priests and religious to their superiors and to the
Holy Father offends Our Lord very greatly.
“My little mother, pray for those who govern. Alas for those
who persecute the religion of Our Lord! If the Government leaves
the Church in peace and gives liberty to the holy Faith, it will
be blessed by God.
“My little mother, do not walk in the midst of luxury. Flee
from riches. Be very friendly to holy poverty and to silence. Have
great charity even for the wicked. Speak ill of no one and flee
from those who do. Be very patient, for patience carries us to
heaven. Mortification and sacrifices please Our Lord a great deal.
“Confession is a sacrament of mercy. For this reason it is neces¬
sary to approach the confessional with confidence and joy. Without
confession there is no salvation.
“The Mother of God wants more virgin souls, which bind
themselves to her by the vow of chastity.
“I should like to go into the convent. But I should like much
more to go to heaven.
“To be a religious it is necessary to be very pure in soul and
body.”
Here Mother Godinho asked, “And do you know what it means
to be pure?”
“I do. I do. To be pure in body is to keep chastity. To be
pure in soul is not to commit sins, not to look at what one should
not see, not to steal, never to lie, always to tell the truth whatever
it costs us.
“Those who do not keep the promises they make to Our Lady
will never be happy in their affairs.
“Doctors don’t have light to cure the sick because they don’t
have love of God.”
“Who taught you all these things?” asked Mother Godinho.
“It was Our Lady. But some I think of myself. I like very much
to think.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEoLrTg4bav3NGEYzumVr99JcTwcukIw8LS34RERdRDHpQAvuanivYL8aFIj3O3o4hPAiBVOeihGu2MTzpsrChkna4iA7wX0_MF7WFvu2M16nGaHtV7Iq7qHMObgHKPKKZmWDWCBA=w491-h810-v0
Jacinta’s mother visited her more than once at the Asilo before
returning to Aljustrel. Mother Godinho made her feel at home,
and drew her out, with a woman’s curiosity, about each member
of her family. She was particularly interested in Teresa, who was
then fifteen, and in Florinda, who was sixteen. “Wouldn’t you
be pleased if they had religious vocations?” she asked.
“God deliver me!” exclaimed Olimpia.
Jacinta did not hear this conversation. But afterwards she said
to Mother Godinho, “Our Lady wants my sisters to be nuns.
My mother doesn’t want them to be, but for this Our Lady will
take them to heaven before long.”
It was on Mother Godinho’s feast day, February 2 (feast of
the Purification of Our Lady, 1920) that she took Jacinta to the
Hospital of Dona Stefania. It was a rather dark and depressing
place, and one of the child’s first disappointments, after she had
been placed in Bed 38 of the children’s ward on the ground floor,
was that there was no chapel, no home for the hidden Jesus. Then
there was a long and careful examination by Dr. Castro Freire,
the chief surgeon, a noted pediatrician. And his conclusion, after
confirming the diagnosis of purulent pleurisy, was that an opera¬
tion must be performed as soon as she got a little stronger.
“It won’t do any good,” said Jacinta. “Our Lady came to tell
me that I am going to die soon.”
One day she looked up and saw her father standing in the
doorway. He had come all the way from Aljustrel to see her; but
he had to hurry back in a few hours, because some of his other
children were sick, and Olimpia needed his help. Perhaps it was
by him that Jacinta sent word to Lucia that Our Lady had visited
her again, and had told her the day and hour of her death.
She had many conversations in the hospital with Mother
Godinho, who came every day. Once the madrinha mentioned a
certain priest who had delivered a wonderful sermon, and was
much praised by fashionable ladies for his theatrical voice and
manner. “When you least expect it,” said Jacinta, “you will
see that that padre is wicked.” Within a few months the great
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFOihjgkQM9nh1DRtXPsk6szFsoxJgvL5lopSh_AZ9YOkqQbzodn6py11ZBfqppIDMBBlDDq7C6YeyKsHi86pOik9LugOIbpBbdXFkz5RrZmlu4Te6HkN0SApYwu70msow7Wa8u1g=w491-h810-v0
preacher left the priesthood under scandalous circumstances. This
was only one of Jacinta’s prophecies that came true. A doctor who
asked her to pray for him when she went to heaven was surprised
to hear her say that he and his daughter were going to die shortly
after she did; and they did. To Mother Godinho, who wanted
to visit Cova da Ina, she said, “You will go—but after my death;
and so will I.”
When Jacinta was taken to the operating room on February io
sh,e was so weak that local anaesthesia had to be given instead of
chloroform or ether. She wept when she saw her body unclothed
and in the hands of men. Dr. Castro Freire then proceeded to
remove two of her ribs on the left side, leaving an opening large
enough to contain his fist. The pain was terrible. “Ai, Nossa
Senhora!” moaned the child. “Ai, Nossa Senhora!” Then she
would murmur, “Patience! We ought to suffer everything to go
to heaven. ... It is for your love, my Jesus! . . . Now you can
convert many sinners, for I suffer much.” At last it was over, and
they took her back to the ward, this time to Bed 60. Doctor
Freire and his assistant felt that the operation had been successful.
Jacinta knew better. For six days she continued to have excruciat¬
ing pains. Then on the night of February 16 she told Mother
Godinho that she had seen Our Lady. “She told me she was
coming for me very soon, and would take away my pains.”
From then on she had no more pain. But she felt certain that
the hour of her going was almost at hand. She sent urgently for
Doctor Lisboa to tell him some secret, probably about himself.
He was busy, and supposed there would be time to see her later.
But at six o’clock on the evening of Friday, February 20, she
called her nurse, Aurora Gomez (“my little Aurora”) and told
her she was about to die and wanted the last sacraments. Two
hours later she made her confession to Father Pereira dos Reis
of the Church of the Holy Angels, who promised to bring her
.Communion next morning.
Jacinta was not there the next morning. At ten-thirty that eve-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF6mBIAMcvdkuBnjSpnp0sRTAuNONj3StuFPDO8bu4RXfF4fDKrJvxE4hZgOe2uY4ud_gogRNidK2jDgfOT3zH_3azEXuJGWCT02sDehYd9LrsEkc7lclYkwlLO66GnxypAWfznwQ=w491-h810-v0
ning the nurse left her for a few moments, and returned just in
time to see her breathe her last sigh, a rosy flush on her cheeks,
a half smile on her lips. Perhaps the nurse’s name was symbolic.
It was night in the dingy hospital, but it was forever dawn in
the soul of Jacinta as the Mother of God bent over Bed 60 and
gathered her into the arms that had enfolded the Christ in infancy
and in death.
The news quickly got about, and some Catholics who believed
in the Fatima apparitions raised money to pay the funeral expenses,
the burial to be on Sunday, February 22, in one of the cemeteries
of Lisboa. The Marquesa of Rio Maior had the body arrayed in
a white Communion dress, while the Marquesa of Lavradio added
a blue cape; and thus, wearing the colors of Our Lady, it was laid
in a white coffin and taken to the Church of the Holy Angels,
where it was placed across two small benches in the sacristy.
In giving permission for this, Father Pereira dos Reis, the pastor
of the church, had had no idea how many people in Lisboa had
heard of Jacinta, and believed in the Fatima revelations. Neverthe¬
less he received the first visitors with patience and kindness. It
was only when more and more kept coming that he became
uneasy. He asked them not to touch rosaries, crucifixes or images
to the body. When some of them refused to obey, he drove them
out of the sacristy. They had not expected this, for he had the
reputation of being a charitable and courteous priest; and there
was a great deal of talk and resentment. Yet the Fatima devotion
had not been approved or authorized, and the Church does not
permit public honors to the dead until their sanctity has been
recognized in some official way after careful investigation. Natu-
ally, too, the Paroco did not wish to offend the Cardinal Patriarch.
And the sanitation authorities might perhaps raise some objection,
as in fact they did. To free himself from further responsibility,
Father Pereira had the body removed to the Casa do Despacho of
the brotherhood of the Most Blessed Sacrament, outside the sacristy,
locked the door, and turned the key over to Senhor Antonio Rebclo
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGGHYfPnUDpiWdeLnJLqFZ3vYvwPJyGevK-Y5VS1DZ1_0nzRjFjx_B7_FcNXEtvrkk0455fEg403mwbWCoMOy2adhT-_qZjZQfnep_EulKjAmmvVl2znOQ5NgMIYCpZg_RBDmGzHg=w491-h810-v0
de Almeida, an undertaker of the Rua da Escola Pohtecmca, in
one of the old and tawdry quarters of the city.
Meanwhile plans for the burial in Lisboa had been given up
when word came from the Baron de Alvaiazere, offering a grave
in his plot in the cemetery of Ourem. On February 23 the under¬
taker allowed a few persons to see the remains before he inclosed
them in a lead casket. All remarked an agreeable odor like that
of flowers, and some insisted that the cheeks still had a faint
roseate flush, giving an impression of life and health. Next morning
the casket was sealed, taken to the Rossio and placed on a train
for Chao de Magas, thence to be driven to Ourem.
On that day there was a large annual assembly of the Saint
Vincent de Paul Society in Lisboa. Many charitable rich men
attended, for one must do something for the poor; and the Cardinal
Patriarch, Dom Antonio Mendes Belo—a man with a strong
purposeful face, that bore a striking resemblance to that of the
actor George Arliss, though perhaps there was a little more rigor
in it—presided. The chairman read a message from Dr. Lisboa,
regretting his inability to be present, for he was busy with another
work of charity concerning one of the children of the Fatima
apparitions. The whole assembly, including His Eminence, burst
into a loud and raucous laugh. This quickly got about the city,
and gave no slight offense to devotees of Our Lady of Fatima.
In anti-clerical circles, on the other hand, it was whispered that
both the Marto children had been murdered by Catholics to avoid
unpleasant contradictions in their stones, and to leave only the
affirmations of Lucia as the official version.
Jacinta was far beyond the reach of cold hearts and lying tongues
in the cemetery at Ourem. A few persons went from Aljustrel to
attend the simple funeral. Tt Marto was one of them, saying
over and over:
“And you died there alone! You died there alone!”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFcxLj3Ft7pi9bZRMJ5gGfY55pEkT-AcdkVNOyJEoYKGm1wjelWjeCRLLmVvmIHRoPZ6OqkCJhdeQ74zLbuAdLn5E-5qYuz_0m9coyL7WUr-BQs9_7XWvHxvocdmF-6l3Yfy8nthQ=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER XVII
Wherever Lucia walked, a dark silhouette between the moors
and the sky, something reminded her of Jacinta or of Francisco.
Every sheep, every star that twinkled into the night, every sun¬
rise and sunset told her again that they would never return. The
wind at Cabe^o brought a dear imaginary voice saying, “I will
never see you again, Lucia. ... I am going to heaven, but you
stay here—alone.” The vagrant scent of rosemary or of wild mint
had power to conjure up an invisible little girl who bent over
her saying, “I do as the angels do, I give you flowers.” On top
of every wall there sat a pensive boy playing softly on his pifa.ro
as he watched the red glare of the dying day on the water of the
Lagoa.
Her mother and sisters tried in many ways to make amends
for their former lack of understanding and sympathy. Maria Rosa
could always be counted upon to do her duty when she saw it.
Her eldest daughter, Mana dos Anjos, had a warm and affectionate
nature; her fine, spiritual and motherly face is evidence that she
could never have done wilful injury to anyone. Yet the very fact
that the apparitions and miracles had now been verified was a
new barrier between Lucia and the other members of her family.
If a prophet is without honor in his own country, neither is a
mystic ever completely at home in his own household. There was
bound to be an unbridgeable gulf between a girl who had spoken
with the Mother of God and had been charged by her with a
mission on which the future of mankind depended, and older
sisters, however lovable and admirable, who were devoted to
dancing, gaiety, husbands and children. A girl with Lucia’s past
was doomed to loneliness in a human sense, no matter where
she might wander in a world whose criteria were no longer hers.
189
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEy0laVwpIRB2VTJuDW9dXZ3oFDQUU4Cd-7m3gl_phwhquUqkktW94OhHjLFcHhM40x-jvBo343kI88TysNOH7EaJSomNxud7A1RgWUfroumh94vGH7W4McKN6AoXsz96BrfWwH=w491-h810-v0
Thus even on that memorable day when her Aunt Olimpia took
her to Ourem to visit the grave of Jacinta, her grief was her
own and incommunicable, having overtones of hope and joy which
the older woman could never have understood. Older? There is
something eternally childlike in Olimpia even in her seventies.
Her privileged niece, at thirteen, had the grave patience of one
who knows what lies behind earthly appearances.
It made her lot no easier to realize that she was now the center
of all the interest, favorable or unfavorable, that the extraordinary
events at Fatima had evoked. She alone could answer the con¬
tinual bombardment of questions and objections; and the only
persons in whom she could fully confide were beyond her reach.
Hers was no small responsibility before God and men.