 sun, and the moon under her feet, and
on her head a crown of twelve stars.”
Whether it was splendid Michael that the children saw at
Cabejo, or one of the other six who stand before the throne of God,
the effect upon them was profound and lasting. The world could
never be the same after such an experience. But this was not all.
For the Angel appeared again to them, not merely once, but twice.
The second apparition was a few weeks after the first. It was one
of the hottest days of that summer. They had taken their sheep
home at noon to inclose them during the blazing hours of the
siesta, and were spending the time playing listlessly at the well in
the shade of the fig trees behind the Abobora cottage, apparently
with no thought of what was about to happen, when they looked up
and saw him there beside them.
“What are you doing?” he demanded. “Pray! Pray a great deal!
The hearts of Jesus and of Mary have merciful designs for you.
Offer prayers and sacrifices constantly to the Most High.”
“How must we sacrifice?” asked Lucia.
“With all your power offer a sacrifice as an act of reparation
for the sinners by whom He is offended, and of supplication for
the conversion of sinners. Thus draw peace upon your country. I
am its Guardian Angel, the Angel of Portugal. Above all accept
and endure with submission the suffering which the Lord will send ” 4 you.
4 The exact words, as Lucia recorded them were: “De tudo que podeis, oferecei
um sqcrificio em acto de reparacao pelos pecadores com que Ele e ofendido e de
suplica pela donversao dos pecadores. Atrai assim sobre a vossa Patria a paz. Eu sou o
Anjo da sua guarda, o Anjo de Portugal. Sobretudo aceitai e suportai com submissdo
o sofrimento que o Senhor vos enviar.”—Memoir IV, p. 32.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGi79RLgZ07ro38hiU-trFK0bniCRV0l4Ez-Z2OCk_vk-QDBWqGhZyTsWTk-IxnFINejIm5hKYAB84-AHBL0Th4HuRLFIzzivZhIUk9SHoGKqQr_7IN7yqtKH4fQeccu-vvulA2yQ=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 41
He was gone. And again the children remained for a long time in
a sort of ecstacy or exultation of spirit, adoring the Lord God whose
messenger had been revealed to them. When this gradually fell
away and they began to feel more like their ordinary selves, Lucia
discovered that Francisco had heard nothing of what the Angel
had said, although, as before, he had seen him plainly.
“Did you speak with the Angel?” he asked. “What did he say to
you?”
“Didn’t you hear?”
“No. I saw that you were speaking with somebody. I heard what
you said to him, but I don’t know what he said.”
The next day Francisco said to his sister:
“Jacinta, tell me what the Angel said.”
“I’ll tell you tomorrow,” said the little girl. “Today I can’t
speak.”
On the following day he sought out Lucia again and said:
“Did you sleep last night? I was thinking all the time of the
Angel and what it might be he said.”
She then repeated the Angel’s words on both occasions. The boy’s
mind was slower than Jacinta’s. He had difficulty grasping what
some of it meant.
“Who is the Most High?” he asked. “What does it mean, ‘The
hearts of Jesus and Mary are attentive to the voice of your
supplications’?”
Lucia tried to explain. It was not easy, for he would break in
constantly with other questions. Besides, the weight of what she calls
“the atmosphere of the supernatural” was still to some extent upon
them both, even after so long a time. She could not think of what to
say. Finally she said, “Some other day! Ask me some other
day!”
He waited patiently, but at the first opportunity he began plying
her with new questions.
“Don’t talk much about these things!” interrupted Jacinta. Yet
with charming inconsistency she went on to say that there was
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGi9SNpGWJtch4KR8AKYE1M8KE7AASmYj2C2hEchTXNOo9Xp-r_rFEo7icOs_5A_RZdaKlrgmc7VqsXDHfOUHvqxrKITKA5gPTlSu64_r5BoH8JsNMoc4v-nCSqVgFoW5NdkzSqpQ=w491-h810-v0
something about the Angel that made her no longer want to talk,
sing or play. “I haven’t strength enough for anything.”
“Neither have I,” said Francisco. “But what of it? The Angel is
more beautiful than all this. Let us think about him!”
Presently he did begin to grasp what the Angel had meant by
sacrifices. From that day forth he vied with the girls in giving up
little pleasures and satisfactions for the sinners of the world. All
three would spend hours at a time lying prostrate on the ground,
repeating over and over the prayer that the Angel had taught.
This must have been in July or August, 1916. As nearly as Lucia
can estimate, it was probably late September or October when
he appeared for the third and last time. Again they had been playing
in the “cave” at Cabego, while the sheep strayed on the slope below;
and after saying their Rosary as usual, they were reciting the prayer
in unison:
“My God, I believe, I adore, I hope, and I love You. I beg pardon
of You for those who do not believe, do not adore, do not hope, and
do not love You.”
They had said this but a few times when they saw the same
crystalline light come swiftly over the valley, and there he was,
beautiful, resplendent, dazzling, hovering in the air before them.
This time he held in one hand a Chalice, and in the other, over it,
a Host. These he left suspended in the air while he prostrated
himself on the ground and said:
“Most Holy Trinity, Father, Son, Holy Spirit, I adore You
profoundly and offer You the most precious Body, Blood, Soul and
Divinity of Jesus Christ, present in all the tabernacles of the earth,
in reparation for the outrages, sacrileges, and indifference with which
He Himself is offended. And through the infinite merits of His
Most Sacred Heart and of the Immaculate Heart of Mary, I beg of
You the conversion of poor sinners.”
This he said three times. Then, rising up, he took the Chalice
and the Host, and kneeling on the flat rock, held the white disk
before him, saying:
“Take and drink the Body and the Blood of Jesus Christ,
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGibe9QgpuCSeLjJH-QDAXR-Kc-seHPsBbWx8G7Y5ipUIh_poParob1OTfGe1Pyf_NyJp1jq5hxUfVcnio8fT-n3_lNB7fST7pwzZeGErBIBNIUvp2Y0i9MkHHOnOCHcwJlAXLMbw=w491-h810-v0
horribly insulted by ungrateful men. Make reparation for their
crimes and console your God.”
They could see drops of Blood falling from the Host into the Cup.
He placed It on the tongue of Lucia. To Jacinta and Francisco,
who had notvreceived First Communion, he presented the Chalice,
and they drank of it. At the end he once more prostrated himself
on the ground and said the same prayer thrice. The children
repeated it with him, Francisco following the others, for he had not
heard the words. Then, for the last time, the Angel of Peace faded
away into the shimmering sunlight.
The sense of the presence of God on that occasion was so intense,
according to Lucia, that it left them weak and abstracted and almost
with the sensation of being out of their bodies. It was Francisco,
again, who was the first to return to ordinary reality, and to call
their attention to the fact that it was growing dark. With such
energy as they could muster, they herded the sheep together and
drove them home. Yet under their weakness they felt an infinite
peace and felicity for which there were no words.
This curious sense of happy debility lasted for days and weeks.
It was a long time before Francisco would venture to speak of what
he had seen and felt. Finally he said:
“I like very much to see the Angel, but the worst of it is that
afterwards we can’t do anything. I can’t even walk. I don’t know
what’s the matter with me.”
A few days later, when he had recovered his normal energy
and spirit, he said:
“The Angel gave you Holy Communion. But what was it
that he gave me and Jacinta?”
“It was also Holy Communion,” put in Jacinta before Lucia
could reply. “Didn’t you see that it was the Blood that fell from
the Host?”
“I felt that God was in me,” he said, “but I didn’t know how
it was.”
Then prostrating himself on the ground, he remained there a
long time, repeating the second prayer of the Angel:
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG6npuTJ9GfWix2JmsP9kUBBg_Ik8MjecQGuawTOFSxkw12DRCPGR3L8OgYVmKDTOZnhvACC6HBgMCxWXCyqXaOGJsPkNnObkK4M-UTUnWo5E8OgBA-Npmi3Xp1NAo7Oes0etKUhw=w491-h810-v0
“Most Holy Trinity, Father, Son, Holy Spirit, I adore You
profoundly and offer You the most precious Body, Blood, Soul
and Divinity of Jesus Christ, present in all the tabernacles of
the earth, in reparation for the outrages, sacrileges and indiffer¬
ence with which He Himself is offended. And through the in¬
finite merits of His Most Sacred Heart and of the Immaculate
Heart of Mary, I beg of You the conversion of poor sinners.”
Such is Lucia’s account of what happened to her and her cousins
when she was nine, and they were eight and six respectively.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGUwVj5FEod6BROPHHDE5kAFUhV-2tV3_JMlTrt8d4lQFhkwHiHMiIUh6yxWohzVhVFxMmQ_zJbFfsUknQhRAT-T3gZi1PIQ-Qmw2JPJ8Cle4gafvOqgxUMp3L5qynO6pcur6m2Zw=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER V
None of the children ever mentioned the Angel either at home
or elsewhere. This became credible to me only after I had gone to
Portugal and had spoken with some of the young shepherds who
now, at about the same age, go barefoot among the sheep on the
Serra da Aire. These short, stocky boys, with their fine eyes and
strong flashing teeth, these handsome girls, so straight and shapely,
are more precocious than those we know, and are not to be judged
by the same standards. Early responsibility has made them resource¬
ful, fearless, and decisive in judgment and expression. 1 hough
their formal knowledge is limited, for few can read or write, their
brains are not cluttered, at any rate, with misinformation and scraps
of half-truths; what they do know they know thoroughly, remem¬
ber exactly, and can speak without hesitation or fumbling. A
barefoot girl of five or six will reply with grace and dignity. Or
if she sees fit she can be as silent as a sphinx.
Lucia, even more than most of these serranas, was endowed with
a reserve so extreme that it was often mistaken for stubbornness
or stupidity. It was easier for her to hold her counsel than to talk.
Moreover, she had not forgotten the petty persecution she had
endured after she and the Matias and Justino girls had seen “some¬
one wrapped in a sheet.” If her own mother and sisters had made
fun of that, who would believe now that an Angel had come to
give her Holy Communion?
Finally, there was something in the experience itself that imposed
silence in a subtle but powerful way. Lucia was never able to
put this into fitting words, either in childhood or in the years
of her memoirs. Yet there it was: an ineffable something which
could only be of God, impressing the words of the Angel upon
45
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG96nDWFPmEupV2yG3ZMHWLELHA3szkw_uUSFwncP8iGDElH_HzLcGF6GXclLv9VexoMvDa1g4jt4VLE0CdpOZmW8tkY2wVehWTlpGd-ZDtvZhl5Wmz8WCso2bofageXjPRn2eZDg=w491-h810-v0
their minds forever, but secretly, in a voice of authority not to
be disobeyed.
Their elders seem to have been wholly unaware of what had
been going on. What is more lonely and misunderstood than the
heart of a child? No doubt these good people of Aljustrel were
too busy with their own affairs to notice anything unusual in the
conduct of three young shepherds who departed with their flocks
early in the morning and were seen no more until they returned
for supper. It happened, too, that there were many changes about
this time in the life of the small communities on the Serra. One
that vividly impressed Lucia’s family, for example, was the de¬
parture of the Prior, Father Pena, and the arrival of a somewhat
more austere priest, Father Boicinha, as his successor. There were
the usual gossipings, the usual appraisals of the newcomer, pro
and con. The more thoughtful parishioners must have felt that
they were lucky to have any pastor at all, when so many com¬
munities in Portugal |iad none. Others gave no quarter: any
pastor, good or bad, was fair game for them.
Father Boicinha was one who spoke truth fearlessly as he saw it.
One of his first acts, and one that made him unpopular with the
young people, was to preach against the inveterate dancing which
commanded almost a pagan and fanatical devotion throughout
the Serra da Aire. Dancing at home, yes, that was all right, he
granted; but those all-night public affairs at Fatima and other
villages were keeping people from going to Mass, leading them
into sin, and in general becoming a scandal; and he declared that
they must stop. There v/ere many protests and murmunngs, of
course, especially among fhe girls. Maria Rosa, however, sup¬
ported the Paroco, and forbade her daughters to attend any more
dances.
“But dancing never was a sin till now,” objected a neighbor,
“and how does it happen that this new Paroco makes it one?”
“I don’t know,” replied Maria Rosa. “All I know is that the
Prior doesn’t want dancing, and my daughters aren’t going to
those gatherings.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGuKCs-jssx2GSjl-crVURkFSi8MUGFyEH0dvZVmzMNQWGqkj2L9CsIENXQUa6FvzoK4PTHJ0aaayE9-CLYCap8_J7FZ0Kx8DM2t-hM08Vc5QYQzHELElonxp4uk6SZdl7Y8AKkkA=w491-h810-v0
47 Our Lady of Fatima
Life was difficult for Maria Rosa that year. Her two oldest
girls, Maria and Teresa, were married, and could no longer help
the family. Her husband Antonio Abobora seemed to be getting
more and more shiftless. From time to time he had disposed of
some piece of land to pay his debts, or, had lost some valuable
property that he had mortgaged, until there was hardly enough
left for the once prosperous family to live on. To make ends
meet, his wife now felt obliged to send Glona and Caroline out
to work as servants, while she herself continued to care for the
house, and, whenever possible, to earn a little extra money by
nursing. Lucia, of course, was the guardian of the sheep. Nearly
all the farm work was devolving upon young Manuel, and it was
not to his taste. Why should he like it, when his father shirked
it at every opportunity?
The war offered this lad a good excuse to avoid the drudgery of
spading and threshing, cutting hay and digging batatas. Portugal
by this time was deeply involved. Every day one heard of some
young man who was leaving for the front, or worse still, of this
one killed, that one maimed, such a one missing. Something of
the sense of uneasiness and apprehension that had become a
settled despair in other countries was beginning to pervade the
clear air of the Serra. But Manuel was young, strong and hopeful.
And one evening he came home with the news that he had
offered himself for service in the army, and would be accepted
if he passed the physical examination.
From that time a mood of profound bitterness took possession
of Maria Rosa. With the four oldest girls away, and her husband
almost always late as he lingered in some wineshop for one more
copozinbo, the once happy family group had dwindled to four
sad and silent persons. One night when the poor woman looked
about the table at young Antonio, Lucia and Manuel—and now
Manuel was going away!—she stared a moment at the empty
places, and suddenly burst into tears. Then, with intense sadness,
she said:
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG_hQ6CVDHrN75pfVe_E6liV2wgxg-MDPlrzMpl8XN8Ma6g-7EpJGSbuZ9zPVnolDpZlcng3pqKBIxhyG6boUIinrzPD37J7uMfwfbjYA4sWOP_9EpAu-ujvMF9jVTagJH2ZDR4=w491-h810-v0
48 Our Lady of Fatima
her head on the rude table, she wept bitterly, until Manuel and
his sister could not help doing likewise. “It was the saddest
supper I ever remember,” wrote Lucia.
Maria Rosa continued to fret and to grieve. Manuel passed his
physical examination and was accepted. Before it was time for him
to leave home, his mother had become ill, and was getting worse
every day. She had recourse to a doctor in a near-by village, but with
no benefit. As the days passed she became so wretched that she
could no longer do housework, and Gloria had to give up her
employment and come home to take care of the family. Other
medicos about the countryside were consulted. None seemeef to
know just what ailed Maria Rosa.
Father Boicinha, who had been noticing her debility with in¬
creasing concern, now offered to take her to Leiria, the nearest
large community, to visit a surgeon who was reputed to be very
skilful. One day the good priest arrived at the door in his mule
cart, and Maria Rosa, with his help, climbed laboriously aboard,
while one of her married daughters, Teresa, went along to take
care of her. It was a long and painful journey in that crude con¬
veyance, for the winding and rocky roads that skirted the moun¬
tainsides were not nearly as good as they are now. At last, how¬
ever, they had left behind the stately old abbey church of Batalha
and had come in sight of the ruins of that fourteenth-century
castle, perched on a high rock far above the plain, where Saint
Isabel once prayed and suffered—for she too, like Maria Rosa, had
a troublesome husband. Somewhere among the white houses with
red tile roofs that nestle around the base of the crag they found
the noted surgeon. But his examination proved more harrowing
than helpful, and Lucia’s mother arrived home that night half
dead from his ministrations and from the long jogging over bad
roads.
It was from another surgeon at San Mamede that she learned the
truth at last. He said she had a cardiac lesion, a dislocated spinal
vertebra, and fallen kidneys. He prescribed a vigorous treatment of
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQETI7PmJ80NKRLBUJmoXjS6NVnOaET40Rn0OXQ3yDvX1xoOy2i4oT3kKgpfhoAZDQcQ_icbw7CxdcbkFRtJzewWtoZoMbpzodnbTB0EUoZkAWEfJNi-irr9MirLlRgQKHvCXd5mrw=w491-h810-v0
pontas de fogo and various medications. Poor Maria Rosa was like
the woman in the Gospel who had “suffered much from many
physicians.”
Lucia thought a great deal those days of the Angel of Peace and
what he had said. It became her greatest consolation, in fact, to
remember the words, “Above all accept and endure with submis¬
sion the suffering which the Lord will send you,” and to ponder
on their implications. Well, she was certainly seeing the fulfill¬
ment of that prophecy! But patience! She must be brave, she must
accept this suffering. When she could think of nothing to do for
her mother, she would go out to the well to