 and I began to say the Rosary with the
crowd.”
Ay, what a crowd! It was larger than ever, and composed of
pilgrims from all parts of Portugal. And besides the usual barefoot
peasants, the rich and the poor, the workers, the ladies and gentle¬
men from many villages and towns, there were some thirty young
seminarians and five or six priests. One of the latter was the Rever¬
end Monsignor Joao Quaresma. Another was the Reverend Father
Manuel Pereira da Silva, then a curate at Leina, who went to the
scene (so he told me) chiefly out of curiosity, with no preconcep¬
tions either way. These priests, with the Prior of Santa Catalina
and Monsignor Manuel do Carmo Gois, had left Leina early
that fine September morning in a squeaky carriage drawn by a
decrepit old horse. When they finally arrived after a rough journey,
they secured a place of vantage on a piece of high ground over-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE3YiVL4S9torcMXiqXNTCYVMn61sWOJfoiHnAzXbYwdyTagQKTgiYOwCbJTrDbhrggt4w6dc37Y5cn6GSRhPAf7jKswtrF3Mj9KZ-vt6wLKYoveSiOnR9jzTLyxqu6EVzDpDD0=w491-h810-v0
looking the vast natural amphitheatre, already dark and seething
with human forms.
“At midday a complete silence, save for the whisper of prayers,
fell over the crowd,” wrote Monsignor Joao Quaresma fifteen
years later. “Suddenly there were shouts of rejoicing . . . voices
praising Our Lady. Arms went up to point at something above.
‘Look, don’t you see?’ . . . ‘Yes, now I see!’ . . . There was
not a cloud in the azure sky. I too raised my eyes and tried to
scrutinize the amplitude of the sky, to see what more fortunate
eyes had first looked upon. ... To my great astonishment I
saw clearly and distinctly a luminous globe that moved from
the east toward the west, slowly and majestically gliding down
across the distance. My friend also looked and had the good
fortune to enjoy the same unexpected and enchanting apparition.
. . . Suddenly the globe with its extraordinary light vanished
before our eyes. . . .
‘What do you think of that globe?’ I asked of my friend,
who seemed to be enthusiastic over what we had seen.
“ ‘That it was Our Lady,’ he replied w'lthout hesitation. It was
my conviction also. The little shepherds looked on the Mother
of God herself; to us was granted the grace to see the carriage
which had transported her from heaven to the barren inhospitable
heath of the Serra da Aire.
“We must say that all those who were near us observed what
we did. For on all sides were heard manifestations of joy and
greetings to Our Lady. Many, however, saw nothing.
“We felt that we were very fortunate. How enthusiastically my
colleague went about from group to group in the Cova da Iria
and afterwards on the highway outside, finding out what they had
seen. The persons interrogated were of various social classes; all
unanimously affirmed the reality of the phenomena which we.
ourselves had witnessed.” 1
1 Letter of October 13, 1932, in De Marchi, pp. 147-148.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFYhDz-kecI538c-7bbS2HG11pNdQ9_n0sJ7z9ts-1545D8bPscT2mvoOLyima-ZbNubhKrmATC5x16sqg0YwxoUI8aPi6jIgFtlcac9tvJT2YmM1RXHKYXNA4lI27eNRVyE495lA=w491-h810-v0
Meanwhile the Lady had revealed herself to the three children,
and Lucia and Jacinta had heard her lovely voice in the briefest
of all their conversations.
“Continue to say the Rosary,” she said, “to bring about the
end of the war. In October Our Lord will come also, and Our
Lady of the Sorrov/s of Carmel, and Saint Joseph with the Child
Jesus, to bless the world. God is content with your sacrifices, but
does not wish you to sleep with the rope—wear it only during
the day.”
Lucia said, “They have begged me to ask you many things:
the cure of some sick persons ... of a deaf mute.”
“Yes,” answered the Lady, “some I will cure, others not. In
October I will perform the miracle so that all will believe.”
And she disappeared in the same manner as before.
So ended the fifth apparition, as Lucia records it.2 Short though
it was, it left the children confirmed in their faith and greatly
consoled. How relieved they were to give up wearing the rough
rope next to their tender bodies at night! What pleased Francisco
more than this, though, was her promise that in the following
month he would see Our Lord.
“Ai que bom!” he cried. “Only one more month, and I love
Him so!”
One of the priests at Cova da Iria on September 13 was the
Reverend Doctor Manuel Nunes Formigao, canon of the cathedral
at Lisboa and professor at the Seminary of Santarem. Noted
throughout Portugal for his integrity and learning, he had been
asked by the Administrator of the Patriarchate in Lisboa to investi¬
gate the strange occurrences, of which conflicting reports had
traveled as far as the capital. Standing in the road about two
hundred meters from the azinheira, he had noticed the peculiar
dimming of the sun’s light in a cloudless sky, but had discounted
this as a possible natural phenomenon due to the altitude of the
2 Memoir IV, p. 41.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEFjgTeN3LYW3bfyl1LzFTgraGBiyRbw6pUgPE9aOboDQtooz0k4ULVDnQW7lgRYmeATmoyKg_F_fgK1AmDyoIZMAuahmHyWMlcpMrn7p47Lw9Yt83aQVXVdW8qo1wAFju6r2FIEg=w491-h810-v0
Serra, almost half a mile above sea level. He had not noticed the
luminous globe reported by Monsignor Quaresma and others, but
the fact that they were so positive about it convinced him that
they must have seen something extraordinary, and stimulated his
curiosity to get at the bottom of the whole affair. For this purpose
he returned to Fatima on Thursday, September 29, and went to
Aljustrel to ask questions. Both Maria Rosa and Olimpia received
him with all respect, and sent out messengers to find the children.
Lucia was at Cova da Ina, the others playing about the village.
Jacinta was the first to arrive.
1 he little girl seemed frightened and embarrassed, in the opinion
of Dr. Formigao, but answered readily, and seemed no longer ill
at ease after her brother made his appearance. Francisco came in
carelessly with his hat on. When jacinta motioned him to take it
off, he paid no attention to her, but sat down on a stool and
looked attentively at the inquisitor. When questioned he answered
calmly and with no sign of embarrassment. The visitor decided
to interrogate him first, and sent Jacinta out to play on the street
with some other girls until he had finished. Then he recalled
Jacinta and questioned her separately.
By that time Lucia had come in from Cova da Iria. She was the
most natural and composed of the three, as Dr. Formigao reported
when he published his first account of the conversations in 1921.
He remarked too that she was a robust, healthy, normal-looking
girl, with no indications of vanity, and no pathological traits
whatever. Poor Maria Rosa hovered about like an anxious mother
bird, worried and lamenting as usual. The sharp eye of Dr.
Formigao noticed a leak in the roof.
All three of the examinations (which have been printed verbatim
in the books of Dr. Formigao, Father De Marchi and Father
Fonseca) give the impression, to this reader at least, that the
children were truthfully reporting what they had actually seen
and heard. The few slight discrepancies offer no real difficulties.
Jacinta, for example, said without hesitation, as the others did.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGX0CRLG9vBkoM5hMYlxWIBAkHZQW3GM_YRMQiEIYHHjEww5ZQxbZEmeHydHSQNBkfrcre7ATvmRZGI3gseIkWuNJ2D8PiXDz87f3Cst1h0H38LZttPwnwzzyopyHXKJYbOinW7ZA=w491-h810-v0
[132 Our Lady of Fatima
that the Lady held her rosaiy in her right hand. When the ques¬
tion was repeated with some insistence, she became confused,
trying to imagine which of her own hands corresponded to the
one in which the Lady had held the beads. Again, Francisco said
he could not see her ears because they were covered with her
mantle; Jacinta agreed. But Lucia was under the impression that
she had seen small dazzling earrings. At first, too, she said that
she had seen a bright gold border on the Lady’s gown; later she
was of the opinion that this was simply a more intense edging
of the light of which all the vision, including the garments, seemed
to be made. This sort of divergence is to be expected in all
human testimony.
Lucia’s examination is the longest and most detailed of the three.
Possibly the priest had heard one of the vague rumors about the
Angel in 1915 or 1916, for almost at the outset he remarked:
“They say that the Lady appeared to you last year also? What
is true about this?”
“She never appeared to me last year,” replied Lucia quietly, “or
before May of this year, nor have I said so to anyone, for it
was not true.”
“Did she show herself desirous that many persons should be
present on the thirteenth day of each month during the appari¬
tions at Cova da Iria? ”
“She said nothing about that.”
“Is it certain that she revealed a secret to you, forbidding you
to tell anyone what it was?” <<t • , • »
It is certain.
“Did she say this only to you or to your companions?”
“To all three.”
“Can you not reveal it at least to your confessor?”
Lucia was silent. She seemed somewhat perplexed.
“They say,” continued the investigator, “that to free yourself
from the importunities of the Senhor Administrator the day when
you were arrested, you told him, as if it were the secret, a thing
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHpQwBlDrlTVeo6aNQDRVWCqN4z7e4wyys1HOROlK00THvG5J48x7Oe38m8ozPq5gnSvyyz3tloFOi89OKE5tE2CqNqKoaFezxHZGWv8IL-WGdRKlCWKUlAUo9oYWmBTx_IbvYLtw=w491-h810-v0
that was not, thus deceiving him, and boasting afterwards of
having beaten him at this game. Is it true?”
“It is not. The Senhor Administrator really wanted me to reveal
the secret, but as I could not tell it to anyone, I kept silent,
in spite of his insisting much that I comply with his wishes. What
I did was to tell all that the Lady had told me, short of the
secret. And perhaps on this account the Senhor Administrator
thought that I had also revealed the secret. I did not try to
deceive.”
“The Lady commanded you to learn to read?”
“Yes, the second time she appeared.”
“But if she said that she would take you to heaven in the
month of the coming October, what good would it be for you
to learn to read?”
“That-is not true. The Lady never said that she would take me
to heaven in October, and I never said that she had told me such
a thing.”
Later in the questioning he asked:
“Why did you lower your eyes sometimes and stop looking at
the Lady?”
“It was because at times she blinded me.”
“Did she teach you some prayer?”
“Yes, and she wanted us to recite it after each mystery of the
Rosary.”
“Do you know this prayer by heart?”
“I do.”
bay it.
“O my Jesus, pardon us, save us from the fire of hell, draw all
souls to heaven, especially those in most need.” 3
3 This is only a partial abstract of the testimony first published in 1921 in
Os episodios maravilhosos de Fatima, by the Visconde de Montelo (the pen name
of Dr. Formigao). Later works of his on the same subject appeared in 1923, 1927,
1929, 1930 and 1936.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEUBwCYngjHAjxkxfFbagfVYvAXcJv1-86GUBbzYOcvnRz9KWMa-2zttICXDxIF_ZS1_0VrHIHHlH0QcU5wL0-wHfVIXXZixsJE7yAkglJyYusGZPf_2kgM1kh0tqDtd3DuCK7-zA=w491-h810-v0
Thus ended the first interrogation o£ which a record was made.
Dr. Formigao admitted that the children had made a favorable
impression upon him. Yet, after thinking the whole matter over
at the Seminary of Santarem, he prepared another series of ques¬
tions of a more searching and fundamental sort, framed to expose
the subtle deceits, if any, of subconscious or satanic agencies. On
October io he boarded a train for Chao da Magas, and there
engaged a horse and two-wheeled buggy in which he was driven
to Vila Nova de Ourem. It was eleven o’clock at night when he
reached a tiny hamlet called Montelo, about two miles from
Fatima. There he found a pen name, “the Visconde de Montelo,”
and a lodging for the night with a family named Gongalves, who
were able to give him full dossiers on the Marto and Abobora
families. (T)
Everyone agreed that Ti Marto was the most solid and trust¬
worthy citizen of the mountains—indeed, he was incapable of
deceiving anyone; and he and his wife Olimpia were universally
respected as good Catholics who practiced what they professed.
Maria Rosa was devout, honest and hard-working. Tier husband
Antonio was indifferent to religion and liked wine too well, but
there was no malice in him. Neither family was poor according
to the standards of the Serra. Neither had done anything to capi¬
talize on the apparitions—quite the contrary; they had discouraged
the cult which had put them to so much annoyance, and this
was especially true of the Aboboras. The children, too, were all
well liked. Most people had disbelieved them in May and June,
but were now inclined to accept their story, since so many had
seen the cloud over the tree on August 13, and had noted the
other strange phenomena in August and September. With all
this background now established in his mind, Dr. Formigao
proceeded on October 11 to Aljustrel, and again visited the home
of Antonio Abobora.
While Lucia was being sought, the investigator noticed that
the leak in the roof was still unrepaired, and asked some questions
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEb6FVc1uxnZQlhGvmVyP4HLtceHzu5VYvYjuSHQc5-6nR3DCfv6oiEnO4hBiykWipFh1ntLFIDu97hV8JzE0TUn0g2c5LiYL2Rr9yLoaVBZHCLIv0QIC1pZrS17XzRkW191qN2ig=w491-h810-v0
of Maria Rosa. He was especially curious to know whether she
had eVer read to Lucia the fairly well-known story of the apparition
of Our Lady to two shepherd children, Maximin and Melanie,
at La Salette in southern France on September .19, 1846. There
were certain resemblances between that episode and the ones at
Fatima. At La Salette Our Lady had told the children a secret,
which they revealed to no one but Pope Pius IX; and she had given
them a warning of great calamities if the people of France did
not stop offending God. The similarity was not necessarily con¬
clusive, yet it might be significant. Father Formigao was curious
to know whether Lucia had been much impressed by the French
account. Maria Rosa thought not; the child had never mentioned
it again, so far as she could recollect.
When the girl appeared, she was questioned at some length in
the presence of four witnesses.
“What did the Lady say she would do to make the crowd
believe she had appeared?” asked Dr. Formigao.
“She said she was going to perform a miracle.”
“When did she say that?”
“She said it a few times—once on the occasion of the first
apparition, and when I asked her the question.”
“Aren’t you afraid that the crowd will do you some harm if
nothing extraordinary is seen on that day?”
“I haven’t any fear,” replied Lucia.
“Did you ever see the Lady bless herself, pray, or finger the
beads?”
“No. . . .”
“Did she tell you to pray for the conversion of sinners?”
“No. She told me to pray to the Lady of the Rosary so that
the war would end.” Lucia explained later that the Lady had asked
for sacrifices rather than prayers for the conversion of sinners.
“Did you see the signs other persons say were seen, such as a
star and roses displayed on the garment of the Lady, and so on?”
“I saw no star or other signs.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGvgIpJ-Sef6Ez3PvW6T65BIC2EAhRdTQcRX9_th2WAhSAYJejUt6XKfvLl3eKCacJapzjwAIQr1FMbD4vllm9Xhn0ZHouUV7T6c8lXXmbfJLpvV0tXcDtm_IaNF-5JshhQazUKIw=w491-h810-v0
“Can you read?”
“No, I can’t.”
“Are you going to learn to read?”
“No, I’m not.”
“How then will you obey the order the Lady has given you
in this regard?”
Lucia was silent. As she later explained, she did not wish to
accuse or embarrass Maria Rosa.
Finally the priest said?
“You have heard your mother read the book called Short Mission
where the story is told of the apparition of Our Lady to a boy and
a girl?”
“Yes, I have.”
“Did you often think of that story and speak of it to other girls?”
“I didn’t think of that story, nor did I tell it to anyone.”
Dr. Formigao then reexamined Jacinta.
“Did you also hear the secret, or was it told only to Lucia?”
“I heard it too.”
“When did you hear it?”
“The second time, on the day of Saint Anthony.”
“Is this secret so that you will be rich?”
“No!”
“Is it so that you will be good and happy?”
“Yes, it is for the good of all three.”
“Is it that you will go to heaven?”
“No.”
“Can’t you reveal the secret?”
“No.”
“Why?”
“Because the Lady said we were not to tell the secret to anyone.”
“If the crowd knew the secret, would they be sad?”
“Yes, they would.”
Now it was Francisco’s turn.
“How old are you?”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHF9WyYt-EUA23qBI8IxqttQFezcO9VEXuLZy6n8lzsjf1EkXmZl6FJAnMVeuw2Bg5QNVwltjaRRnansRLBeSEFLKpsgJI0wcsF0l5oL8yxQ438ESViF2iX5LGARfPmA83n-TXa=w491-h810-v0
“I am nine years old.”
“Did you only see Our Lady or did you also hear what she said?”
“I only saw her, I heard nothing of what she said.”
“Was there some light around her head?”
“Yes, there was.”
“Could you see her face well?”
“I could see, but only a little, because of the light.”
“Were there some ornaments on her dress?”
“There were some edgings of gold.”
“Of what color is the crucifix?”
“It is white.”
“And the chain of the rosary?”
“That also is white.”
“Would the crowd be sad if they knew the secret?”
“They would.”
Doctor Formigao believed that all three had told him the truth,
whatever the final explanation might be. He was inclined to think
that the test of whether or not they had been deluded in some
way would be the “miracle” promised by the Lady for October 13.
He went away resolving to let nothing keep him from being at
Cova da Iria on the day after the morrow.
Another priest who examined the children about that time was
Father Po^as, prior of Porto de Mos. It is Ti Marto who remembers
how brusquely this self-appointed inquisitor said to Lucia:
“Look here, girl, now you are going to tell me that all this
is lies and witchcraft. If you don’t say so, I will say it and have
it said everywhere. . . . Everybody will believe me . . . and you
shall not escape!”
Lucia made no reply. The Prior was furious, or he pretended
that he was. But in the end, after he had