 somehow
made her feel more at home; it was like the one over the altar
at Fatima. The Mass over, she followed the portress to the
sacristy, where she was presented to the Mother Superior and to
the Chaplain.
Reverend Mother was not favorably impressed by the tired girl
of fourteen who stared at her rather sullenly from under dark
brows, and seemed to have a fixed pout on her heavy, half-parted
lips. She had refused to take her at first, telling the Bishop frankly
that she wanted no simpletons in her house, because she did not
want to make simpletons of the other pupils. “Yes, she is simple,”
Dom Jose had said, “but I don’t think you will find her a simpleton,
and I wish you would take her for a while.” As she looked at the
girl herself, Reverend Mother began to wonder if she should not
have been firmer with her old friend, the former professor at the
Seminary of Porto. But having given her word, she proceeded to
carry out all his wishes.
“When they ask you your name,” she said, “you will reply,
‘Call me Maria of the Sorrows.’ ”
“Yes, Reverend Mother.”
“When they ask you where you are from, you will say, ‘I am from
near Lisboa.’ ”
199
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEKDvpi6A4BkuTW-d3LfeQc8eX1_dNznIYQpqL_xFkIUP0TO7bzIGlDyN277a2CmPNJMrtxQaxkSkMCtnQQeMZCAelQZmK052siInVfntBpJtRF-vc1b-juO7grO-OojEOY8PY2vQ=w491-h810-v0
200 Our Lady of Fatima
“Yes, Reverend Mother.”
“As for what happened at Fatima, never again mention it to
anyone, either by question or by answer.”
“Yes, Reverend Mother.”
“Not to anyone. Do you understand?”
“Yes, Reverend Mother.”
“You will not go to walk with the other girls, but you will not
say why you do not go. Do you understand, my dear?”
“Yes, Reverend Mother.”
“That is all.”
The new student was shown her room and given a uniform of
black and white checked gingham such as the others wore. So she
was to be called Maria of the Sorrows. She would have preferred
Maria of Jesus, since she had been christened Lucia of Jesus. But
patience! “You shall have much to suffer.” This was only the
beginning. tD D
For the next four years Maria of the Sorrows led the quiet and
ordered life of an average convent boarding-school student. Every
day after early Mass there would be a succession of classes,
recreation, manual work, prayers; manners to learn, themes to
write, head-splitting declensions and conjugations to memorize,
little speeches to be made. As the months passed she learned sewing,
embroidering, typewriting, cooking, waiting on table, scrubbing
floors, polishing brass and silver. Doubtless there were many
blunders and heartaches at first before she was able to adapt herself
to a routine so different from that of Aljustrel. But after a while the
sense of haste and strain left her, and she became a faithful and
obedient, if not a brilliant, pupil.
During the four years she never revealed her identity. She never
mentioned Fatima; not even to her mother, who visited her twice,
once at Porto and once at the convent of the order in Braga. Not
once in all that time did any of the nuns or students suspect who or
what she was. The wise Mother Superior had taken good care to
carry out the Bishop’s instructions. She understood perfectly why
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFlVc3XFxiEDPURZstJwNLuNWNsohvbiwcgTPx7PjogenebeKpkZCzRG58EDE2kPhOH0eds1wAmWdddLkJqk95XfCqzvuR2-Fk-UDuplMTA4Ps3vp1a-lhRv-4-Ve390xIDshToNA=w491-h810-v0
201 Our Lady of Fatima
it had to be so. If the apparitions turned out to be illusory (so she
explained later) Lucia would gradually forget them, and it was
better so. If they were real, she would never forget and no harm
would be done; but she would escape the danger of learning false
pride through flattery until she had attained a certain degree of
maturity. The young girl herself came to understand the necessity of
this. She began to think of herself naturally as Maria das Dores. At
moments it seemed as if Lucia Abobora had been only a girl she had
dreamed about. If now and then some journalist, investigating the
phenomena of Fatima, traced a clue to the convent door, the
portress would answer calmly, “No, there is no one here called
Lucia.” The Abobora girl, for all practical purposes, was dead.
Yet there were compensations in this lonely existence. To the
casual eye the Asilo de Vilar was a plain building on a hilly street
in a rather dingy part of the town, with a drab seminary on one
side, a factory on the other, and a cemetery near by. It was very
different when one had passed through the quiet building and
ascended the hill on the other side to the gardens that lay hidden,
like all the secrets of the great King, from vulgar prying eyes.
Surely Saint Dorothy, patron of horticulture, must be well pleased
with those six gardens, flamboyant and fragrant with rare and
gorgeous flowers of every color and description.
There was a wonderful view also from the upper windows of
the house or from a nearby hill. One could see the River Douro
coiling like a great flat silver snake as it finished its long course from
the mountains of Spain to the harbor of Porto, where ships of all
nations came and went. It was thrilling to glimpse the pine forest of
Cavaco far away, and beyond the long yellow tongue of beach that
defined the harbor, the sunlight on the vast and blue Atlantic. The
ocean always reminded her of “the grandeur and the power of God.”
Convent routine, which seems so oppressive to people of the
world, becomes delightful and satisfying to those who accept it
freely. Lucia learned to love the order and regularity of it, the
freedom from the petty frictions and worries of family life, the
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFwlhewIAlYac9YZteW3C1JubCclL5DoFj4frK-GZ_8HByFGgmlLUDUyzAf8mYpeBwQjq8y7MCg66fVF6y7bYuxSRDXmvu7ci9vBSOFlpMcTH6OFdwo1I4nyY8Ar8e7ZiLi3vTnxg=w491-h810-v0
sense of living only in the present, and leaving the past and the
future in the hands of God. She came to love the good women
who toiled so cheerfully and unselfishly so that she might have an
education, far from the prying questions of pilgrims and the small
daily vexations of Maria Rosa. Yes, they had faults, there, too;
but their effect was lessened by prayer, and by the firm tact of a
good superior. Here in these cloisters there was peace. Lucia began
to be glad that the Bishop had sent her there.
The sisters on their part soon discovered, what many others
remarked, that first impressions of Lucia were deceptive, perhaps
because her humility kept her from trying to make a favorable
impression. As the Bishop had said, her simplicity was by no means
that of a simpleton. They came to respect and love her ready
obedience, her unselfish willingness to sacrifice her own convenience
for others at all times, her extraodinary devotion to God. More than
most girls of her age, she seemed constantly aware of His presence
no matter what she was doing, and when she had leisure moments
she liked to spend them in the chapel rather than playing or talking.
She read and reread the Portuguese translation of “L’Histoire d’une
dme,” the autobiography of little Saint Therese of Lisieux, who
was beatified in 1923. Lucia’s own experiences helped her to
understand the desire for suffering reflected in many such passages
as this: “My heart thrills at the thought of the frightful tortures
Christians are to suffer at the time of the Antichrist, and I long to
undergo them all. Open, O Jesus, the Book of Life, in which are
written the*deeds of Thy Saints: all the deeds told in that book I
long to have accomplished for Thee.’’ 1 Yet Lucia, like the Little
Flower, realized that her vocation was not martyrdom, but love.
Her other favorite saint was the young Jesuit John Berchmans, who
had given so perfect an example of the virtue of obedience, of
small daily duties heroically performed. “I like these two saints,”
she said, “because I can imitate them.”
1 Chapter XI.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFsN-2KIeaIF7vwi-SxEitJG63iT7TtGginELNU6scXatjufQsgaAhaW2iDa-Dkm6tAnBKHVkHYRaLFEzzBxcxLIGgBhFNia_usHCzOIFUTkRx1KwxQEZNco3NkSHMP4hiHnqaZ=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 203
After four years of this Jife of study, work and prayer at Porto
and other convent schools of the order, Lucia was a well-bred self-
contained young woman of eighteen. The time was coming when
she must make up her mind what to do with the rest of her life.
She had no desire to go back to the world. Perhaps it was her love
for Little Saint Therese that made her think of becoming a discalced
Carmelite. But the'Mother Superior discouraged this. She had had
every opportunity to study Lucia during those four years. “You are
not strong enough for such austerities, child,” she said. “If you really
have a vocation, it would be better to choose some order with a
simpler rule.” Lucia accepted this with her usual humility as the
decision of God, and after some further thought asked to be
admitted to the Institute of the Sisters of Saint Dorothy.
“Why do you wish to be a sister of Saint Dorothy?” the Mother
Provincial asked.
“So that I shall be more free to go to the chapel and pray.”
The Mother Provincial made her wait another year. At the end of
that time, finding her of the same mind, she accepted her as a
postulant. This was in 1925, at the convent in Tuy, just across the
Spanish border. It was the year of the canonization of Little Saint
Therese of Lisieux.
A year later, on November 2, 1926, Lucia became a novice. Dur¬
ing the following year, 1927, she had two visions in which Christ
Himself appeared to her, confirming the requests of His Mother
concerning the devotion to her Immaculate Heart, and giving her
permission to reveal certain things, but not of course the Last Secret
of the July apparition. On November 3, 1928, she took her first
vows as a lay sister. It was not until six years later, on October 3,
1934, that she made these perpetual.
Lucia’s mother, two of her sisters, some cousins and a woman
friend traveled all the way from Aljustrel to be present on that
occasion. It was the first time she had seen Maria Rosa in thirteen
years. 1 hree times the good woman had written to ask what she
wanted as a present on her profession day. The third time Lucia
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHI00xt-78zxgDnkDptWLmzKnR_F5LxqnZ4M5r2_J4cbQn2ocvLNh3K0Sp_dS7YABebmWXK5GtDPnYEHKg-XSRCORNJvZ_jNZW5X6dkH8Ud2HRR4-2LmEPSs-REsTju0Uil9xTxxg=w491-h810-v0
had answered, “Some flowers and some bees.” So Maria Rosa
brought a large bunch of flowers, smelling of the Serra, and a
honeycomb full of bees, no doubt carefully inclosed. Was there
some symbolism in this, or was Sister Maria of the Sorrows human
enough to tease her mother a little for those scoldings and spankings
of other days? Perhaps she merely wanted to spare her an expense
she knew she could not afford.
Since 1934 Sister Dores (as she is commonly addressed in the
cloister) has performed her humble duties in various convents of
the order. She is often heard singing softly to herself as she scrubs
floors, waits on table, or peels potatoes. But she is most happy in the
hours she spends before the Blessed Sacrament. She does not need
images to arouse her devotion. She usually kneels with her head
bowed, her hands open and crossed upon her breast. Thus she
remains sometimes for hours, sometimes all night if permitted.
One day she and another lay sister were walking from the convent
at Tuy in Spain across the international bridge to do some shopping
at Valen^a, which is in Portugal. At the Portuguese end of the
bridge they met three ladies who stopped them and said, “Aren’t
you Sisters of Saint Dorothy? From the convent of Tuy? Oh, how
nice! We are going there. We hear that Lucia is there—the one
who saw Our Lady at Fatima!”
The two Dorotheans looked at each other.
“It’s true that she is in Spain, isn’t it?”
“Oh, no, Senhora, I don’t think so,” said Sister Maria. “In fact
I’m quite sure she is in Portugal now.”
“Oh!”
When the ladies had gone on, Sister Maria das Dores chuckled
very much as the three children had when they tumbled over a
wall in 1917 to escape from questioners.
Just when her silence about her past and Fatima was broken has
not been revealed. Certain it is that on the night of January 25, 1938
(the feast of St. Paul’s conversion, on being blinded by light from
heaven) the young lay sister looked out of the window of her cell
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFq1TxRTf3p5_XvrL0xu0FrW7s1wQtXnKJLTc6DT6-e9uKrbnI-bhjveWZ5yttXsAX-G_REFQpiwHEuGgRnQBq9DmzYxhRpZ3OWyXiNo_5ZhbpJ_iKEKH-98tvNOHquyO9UgBsWzA=w491-h810-v0
and saw the sky aflame, the whole vault of heaven fearfully aglow
with crimson fite which continued balefully from nine o’clock in the
evening until two o’clock in the morning. Next day the newspapers
all over Europe recorded it. People had seen it from the North Sea
to the Adriatic. In south Germany especially it struck fear to many
Catholic hearts. In Fribourg, Switzerland, the sky was said to be
“like a furnace.” The same sinister glare was seen on the Belgian
coast, in Spain, Hungary, Norway, Italy, Poland, and Greece.
Sister Maria of the Sorrows was convinced at once that this was
the strange light Our Lady had predicted at Cova da Ina on July 13,
1917. “When you shall see a night illuminated by an unknown
light, know that it is a great sign that God gives you that He is
going to punish the world for its crimes by means of war, hunger,
and of persecution of the Church and of the Holy Father. To pre¬
vent this-1 come to ask the consecration of Russia to my Immaculate
Heart and the communion of reparation on the first Saturdays. . .
So it had come at last! It was “nigh, even at the gates.” Sister
Maria was undoubtedly allowed to communicate her fears to the
Bishop of Leina at once. That she did so in good time is plain from
what she wrote him at Tuy on August 8, 1941:
“Your Excellency is not unaware that some years ago God
manifested that sign which the astronomers choose to designate by
the name Aurora Borealis. If they look well into it, they will see
that it was not and could not be, in the form in which it appeared,
such an aurora. But be that as it may, God was pleased in this way
to make me understand that His justice was ready to let fall the
blow on the guilty nations, and in this way to begin to ask with
insistence for the reparatory Communion of the first Saturdays and
the consecration of Russia. His end was not only to obtain mercy
and pardon for all the world, but especially for Europe. God in
His infinite mercy made me feel that this terrible moment was
approaching, and Your Excellency is not unaware how on opportune
occasions I used to point it out. And I still say that the prayer and
penance that are done in Portugal have not yet placated the divine
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQElDHCIcRX5mGjD-PqfOIap6TNk70d59BY8FaihwIWprqx9e1d2m0JgVTlNHahNkftHhIzqjFEacgAEVMYDyk4eI3OnNo36n7TOSutbpUiu2mVqfA7CrpYkBUAJDu3QtlpKF0Nl=w491-h810-v0
justice, for they have not been accompanied by contrition or amend¬
ment. I hope Jacinta is interceding for us in heaven.” 2
Pope Pius XI was undoubtedly informed about this. Sister Maria
Lucia was allowed to write him a letter which has not been made
public, but a person worthy of all credit assures me he saw a copy of
it at the beginning of 1939. Whether the Holy Father believed or
doubted the Fatima story, or whether his last illness and many
anxieties made him postpone consideration of it during those months
of his last illness, I do not know. As everyone does know, he died
early in 1939, and the impact of World War II fell upon Poland in
September of that year. Stalin, having instigated the Spanish War
as a prologue, had now given Hitler the green light for the
destruction of a pivotal Catholic country in the east.
“I come to ask the consecration of Russia to my Immaculate
Heart and the Communion of reparation on the first Saturdays.
If they listen to my requests, Russia will be converted and there
will be peace. If not, she will scatter her errors through the world,
provoking wars and persecutions of the Church. The good will be
martyrized, the Holy Father will have much to suffer, various
nations will be annihilated.”
2 Memoir III, p. 7.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEvtdRh-BgJs2BUm9P7F2hmz4MppV1nQSCorCop_cOoqJwxIgjeQtAU9dnlHqgPszcTc1a4k-Mg8O72LB-R8Khca0HmXTK3R2YotJqM_siOcylA-dnv0k5sw50SNg0aszuwWKAhxA=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER XIX
Sister Maria das Dores was not long frightened by the strange
illumination. She could see beyond the hellish thing that was
descending upon Europe, and she knew that the Lady who had
promised never to forsake her would conquer in the end. While
statesmen toiled and lied, while the flower of youth was blasted,
while old cities perished in flame and agony, the lay sister of Saint
Dorothy went about her humble tasks and prayers as usual.
Sometimes sorrow visited her, as when she learned that her mother
had died on the feast of Our Lady of Mount Carmel in 1542; and
the rule of all strict orders, prohibiting members from leaving to
attend the funerals of relatives, must have augmented the grief
of a daughter who had long since forgiven the severities of poor
Maria Rosa. Yet there are many joys also in convent life. Not the
least was the good news that came from time to time from Cova da
Iria.
The cult had grown astonishingly since her departure in 1921.
The Bishop’s attitude had been one of encouragement from the
beginning. Some say he received a secret message from Our Lady
through Lucia. Others insist that he was won over by a miraculous
ram of flowers that he saw at Cova da Iria. His unwillingness to
publicize himself or to exploit Sister Maria das Dores during her
lifetime makes it difficult to get at the exact truth. Certain it is,
however, that only four months after her leavetaking he permitted
the first Low Mass in the chapel of the apparitions, and purchased
the surrounding land from the Aboboras and others. In November
of the same year (1921) he set some men to work making a cistern
near