 “Don’t you see that that makes part of
the secret? And that then it will be discovered?”
“All right. I won’t say anything, then.”
Nevertheless, Jacinta continued to worry constantly about this
future Pope. One very hot afternoon, when even the sheep were
nodding in their shelter, the three children were sitting under the
olive trees on the stone slabs that covered the well behind the
house of Antonio Abobora. Francisco became restless and began
to look for some wild honey among the flowers that grew in a
little bramble thicket near by. Lucia was soon doing likewise.
Jacinta remained sitting on the edge of the well, staring into
space. Presently they heard her say:
“Don’t you see the Holy Father?”
“No.”
“I don’t know how it is, I see the Holy Father in a very large
house, on his knees before a table, with his hands over his face,
crying. In front of the house there are many people, and some
are throwing stones at him, others are cursing him and saying
very foul words to him. Poor little Holy Father! We must pray
a lot for him!”
Who was this Vicar of Christ that Jacinta saw stoned by a mob?
There is a story in Portugal that Lucia has reason to believe that
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGLzEc1sX_ZVhtPBQXB53-3OE3yu8dHen5NhMZMEd4vrP5RhVlHAxyGR8CZjRXEz9A4qhRBUDcUk66c2COa30m6PercqTsVogF8UtWpBuSbYRGqX4zdxG8yQXzj0QEkXkRzWsy4xQ=w491-h810-v0
it may be Pope Pius XII. She assured me that Jacinta did not
indicate any particular Pope—“just a Pope.” But he was a very
real one to her.
Going to the Marto house one day, Lucia found her sitting
alone, still and very pensive, gazing at nothing. “What are you
thinking of, Jacinta?”
“Of the war that is going to come. So many people are going
to die. And almost all of them are going to hell. Many houses
are going to be knocked down, and many fathers will be dead.
Look, I am going to heaven, and when, some night you see that
light that that Lady told us would come before it, you go there
also.”
“Don’t you see that nobody can run away and go to heaven?”
“It is true, you can’t. But don’t be afraid. In heaven I must
pray a great deal for you! And for the Holy Father. And for
Portugal, so the war won’t come here. And for all the priests.”
In her simplicity Jacinta would say, “I wish I could see the
Holy Father. Why doesn’t he come here, if so many other people
can come?”
Lucia explained how far Rome was, and what a busy man the
Pope must be. With a world war going on, and a devotion to the
Immaculate Heart to establish, and Russia to be converted so that
the world might have peace, it was quite possible that he had
not even heard of Aljustrel.
Jacinta took seriously the apostolate that had come to her. Persons
who spoke with her found themselves turning a little more to
prayer. Ti Marto and his wife had somewhat neglected the
Rosary. Jacinta told them Our Lady wanted every family to say
it together every day. After some insistence on her part they
resumed the old custom, and began to like it. It was hard to
resist Jacinta, she wds so earnest, so persistent, h et most days
she seemed as light-hearted as ever as she followed the sheep in
the August sunshine. Sometimes she would dance and play games
while they grazed. Or as she went about picking blue flowers or
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFUMlFl8t_yqbZgWCWadx3TI0GT4jGNfdXXKHqihWBanaZi0qndvr_Rpuwf_WkQ8IA0RDDYao0PWJEI2z3Z51MvqepVNMPJZ15IwsVXu-7zp5bJaKIkj7nllfUOB1Z2B23Z09IYEQ=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 95
chasing white butterflies, she would make up little songs to some
of the brief prayers that Father Cruz had taught her. Passers-by
would hear something like “Jesus, I love you! Immaculate Heart
of Mary, save the poor sinners!” floating over the moors in a clear
high voice that seemed to summon from another world melodies
never before heard in this one.
There was a certain brooding sadness, though, under her gaiety,
as if she knew what lay at the end of the road she had taken.
Perhaps it was one of the first and surest signs of the validity
of the spiritual experiences of these three shepherd children that
the world, which had persecuted Christ and His saints, was already
resentful of their work, and ready to avenge itself upon them
in one way or another. The anti-clerical press continued to jibe
and grumble. In fact its indignation had reached the point where
rhetoric ■ flowers into rank political action. A few days before the
thirteenth of August, when people all over Portugal were wonder¬
ing whether there would be another apparition at Cova da Ina,
Ti Marto and Antonio Abobora received formal notices from the
Administrator of the Council of Ourem, head of the district to
which Fatima and Aljustrel belonged, ordering them to present
their children, the ones who had disturbed the public peace so
notoriously, at the town hall of that city for trial, at the hour of
twelve noon on Saturday, August n, 1917.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHGTHfq0ShmVxdgk12kj_WgOvaJEQeCfEJojMj6MV1QHOo7_bNh0m7E9kz7wOs8pWX9iQxqpVYRJQLSkk3hBOZTAhEp2gP2D_yVyIJl8q1lb0p8jtHI71eIpSYoJBdSF19-xAQH_g=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER X
The Administrator of Ourem at that time was Arturo de Oliveira
Santos, by trade a blacksmith, by temperament both an idealist
and a materialist. If his idealism had prevailed, if he had been
able to place his zeal, his imagination and his tenacity of purpose
at the service of the Church, he might conceivably have become
a bishop, a missionary, even a saint. For some obscure reason he
had chosen early in life to follow his own impulse and his own
interest. Yet there was something in his nature that found it im¬
possible to love the naked and searing form of materialism; like
most human beings he had to veil that terrible figure with some
rags of principle before he could take it to his heart. The draperies
were supplied him gladly by the leaders of that Revolution which
for centuries has been maneuvering to place the Church of Christ
in the state of siege in which she now stands in Europe. Thus
inevitably he became a devout and tireless member of what might
be called the Mystical Body of This World. “Mystical?” Yes.
For the invisible head of a kingdom devoted to uprooting the work
of Christ must obviously be the disfranchised spirit of revolt of
whom He said, “The prince of this world cometh, and in Me
he hath not anything,” and of whose followers He remarked
ironically, “The children of this world are wiser in their generation
than the children of light.”
As one of those wise children of the flesh, Arturo had logically
set out, as a young iron worker, to cultivate all persons and insti¬
tutions that might help him reap the fruits of the choice he had
made. At twenty-six he joined the Grand Orient lodge at Leiria,
under the very shadow of that Gothic ruin where Saint Isabel
had wept and prayed. He became indoctrinated with the esoteric
lore of a syncretistic and naturalistic religion which had been the
96
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEXrMK43p_7VXeDBnW_3q7keQAdEDmU8jcNeqNifrd9DGLGcRUBsnig0uQxtPCF5nKCOGvakFDt5skPwThU6961N1PZkpCcnVF3QByXbiPeWHR7zYApwKjDZLqVT5nc6JCUpswmgQ=w491-h810-v0
chief opponent of the Catholic Church in modern times, and which
already boasted that, by planning and carrying out the Portuguese
revolution of 1910, it had taken a long step toward the total
elimination of Christianity in the Iberian Peninsula. In 1911 the
Grand Orient chief, Magahaes Lima, was able to predict that in a
few years no young man would wish to study for the priesthood,
and Affonso Costa could assure all his brethren, and some dele¬
gates from the French lodges, that one more generation would
see the finish of “Catholicism, the principal cause of the sad
condition into which our country has fallen.” Indeed there was
much evidence to support the prediction if not the accusation. In
19x1 the new masters of Portugal seized Church property, scattered,
imprisoned and exiled hundreds of priests and nuns, and gave the
Cardinal Patriarch of Lisboa five days to leave that city, never to
return. Refugee priests and religious fled to France and elsewhere.
Some knelt at Lourdes and begged the Mother of God to help
their unhappy country, once proud to call itself her land, now
a spectacle of anarchy and unbelief, with a new revolution every
month.
Arturo de Oliveira Santos owed his success in life, such as it
was, to the miseries of the Church. Perhaps he had not intended
this. His wife seems to have been a Catholic of sorts, and all his
children had been baptized—though their names, “Democracia,”
“Republica,” “Libertade,” and so on, smdlled more of the lodge
than of the sacristy. Perhaps in a dim corner of his mind there
smouldered a vague hope of sending for a priest if he should ever
find the world slipping from under him and eternity yawning
beneath. But all was going his way when he moved his smithy,
which he called appropriately the Forge of Progress, to Ourem.
And having mastered the art of easy smiling and vigorous hand¬
shaking, the brisk and expansive affability so highly esteemed in
a world given to salutations in the marketplace and the first seats
at banquets, he had little difficulty in founding a new lodge there.
By 1917, when he was but thirty-three years old, he was its
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH7542UnypC9_lZsk199qH1Zio0mJKLgFfXPJ3DTmA8K9c3EU6jvAA5Ar6bmEtGf6hWmxs-T1MrsSJqYWERG58jCqlHgrK7j101Dj_pRT-feXRNAAiHGXJxqAgYfj3y-HYoFdyVDA=w491-h810-v0
President; and thanks to the mysterious brotherly bond of those
who walk through the shady labyrinth of degrees and initiations
to sunny places of honor, he was also President of the town
Administration and of the Chamber, and Deputy Judge of Com¬
merce—in short, he had become a sort of republican czar of the
whole district, including Fatima and Aljustrel. Fewer and fewer
went to Mass and to the sacraments; there were more divorces,
not so many children; and when he arrested six priests and held
them incommunicado for eight days, the leading Catholic laymen
in the Council and the Chamber were so busy making profitable
compromises that they did not have time to protest loudly enough
to be heard. To the blacksmith and his friends the fio-ht for
progress and enlightenment, as they preferred to describe their
conflict with the Church, was all but won.
What a challenge it must have been to the vigilance and zeal
of such a man to hear that two or three thousand of his people
had gone to Cova da Iria to hear a couple of children converse
with an invisible woman, and that other thousands everywhere
were talking of a new apparition of the Virgin! To such idealists
it was axiomatic that Mary belonged to the Middle Ages, and
had no place in modern life. She was part of the supernatural order
on whose grave so many earnest liberals and radicals had laid the
stone of unbelief. It was not to be tolerated that she should arise
from that darkness into the light of the twentieth century. The
whole Masonic press resounded with a clarion call against what
liberal editors called “an invasion of mysticism,” “a revival of
reaction and superstition,” “a wanton act of aggression on the
part of the clergy.” Moved to indignation by these and similar
protests, the Administrator of Ourem decided to take a firm stand.
Hence the order to the parents of the children to present them
for trial.
The two fathers reacted characteristically.
“There’s no sense in taking such young children before a court
of that kind,” said Ti Marto. “Besides, it’s three leagues, and
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGAHIoIFZZmSnCe-4tCSmyk25WpKb1rUDUZ-kWMufhxoxdixl7yP5Eef7W2fXSsym9fsi99IxZwNYM81TGPNfJrkzOfzHekEDcYN0LrLKcgRQjw9_vvLDxGe_NnQtp9bv_7fO44Zw=w491-h810-v0
99 Our Lady of Fatima
that’s too far for them to walk. And they don’t know how to
ride on a beast. I’m not going to do it. And I’ll go over and tell
the Administrator why.” Olimpia agreed that he was perfectly
nght: His brother-in-law, Antonio, was more complacent. “They can
arrange things to suit themselves over there,” he grumbled. “I
don’t know what it’s all about.” 1 He was inclined to agree with
his wife Maria Rosa that if Lucia was lying, it would be a good
thing to have her taught a lesson; while if by any chance she
was telling the truth—though they both doubted this—Our Lady
would take care of her.
Lucia heard these discussions and thought bitterly, “How differ¬
ent my father is from my uncle and aunt! They put themselves
in danger to defend their children, but my parents turn me over
with the greatest indifference, that they may do with me what
they will. But patience!” she argued with herself. “I expect to
have to suffer more for Thy love, O my God, and it is for the
conversion of sinners!” 2
On the morning of Saturday, August 11, her father set her on
the back of a burro, and they started up the hill. Stopping on the
way, they found Ti Marto getting himself a bite to eat, as uncon¬
cerned as ever; and he repeated, with emphasis, that he had no
intention of taking his young children before a court, for it was
all nonsense. However, he would go and speak for them, and
if Antonio was in a hurry, let him go ahead, and he would meet
him at Ourem. One of Ti Marto’s material advantages over his
brother-in-law was the ownership of a horse.
Lucia meanwhile had slipped off the burro and had gone to
look for Jacinta, whom she told, weeping, what had happened.
“Never mind,” said the little girl, though she was evidently
frightened. “If they kill you, you just tell them that I am like
you, and Francisco even more so, and that we want to die too.
1 Memoir I, p. 16.
2 Memoir II, p. 21.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQERWGXxBxRse47dYvDNhdl2xY9Z6VbYIuSPnqwycbTTu8dioljAdG1Y39MvDEgjAKNU0eb8CSehBud3byct8reQSW8JmeDUTKMfAfEmxTnK0qIqrme597yMb5bdnKjW6Qn-T3ja=w491-h810-v0
ioo Our Lady of Fatima
And now I will go with Francisco to the well to pray very hard
for you.” 3
They embraced again, tearfully, and parted. Lucia’s father put
her back on the burro. He walked stolidly along beside her, stalf
in hand. The small beast lurched and swung on the hot glaring
road. Now and then Antonio would give him a sharp command
or a blow on the flank to expedite his pace. The Administrator
was expecting them at twelve o’clock! The poor burrito did his
best; but something had to be sacrificed to speed, and Lucia fell
off three times in the course of the long journey. The road went
uphill and downhill, circling around many a bald slope irregularly
criss-crossed with stone walls or bristling with stunted pines. It
seemed to Lucia that they would never get there—yet it would
be too soon! She was bruised, aching, disheveled and unhappy
when at last they arrived in the ancient Moorish town.
Ourem lies sprawled along both sides of the main road, under
a terraced and cultivated lull crowned with the noble ruins of an
old castle thrust like a dark threat against a cobalt sky. Antonio
led the jouncing burrito over the cobblestones of the main street.
He knew where the Administration building was. It was closed,
however; not a soul was stirring anywhere about; the heat was
suffocating. He prodded the beast along to the marketplace, hoping
to find someone to direct him. There he saw the slight figure of
a man who had just dismounted from a horse. It was his brother-
in-law.
“Well, is everything settled?” asked Ti Marto jovially.
Settled! Antonio retorted somewhat hotly and profanely that
they had found the place shut and nobody there.
Ti Marto suggested that, as it was high noon, they had better
find something to eat before visiting the Administrator. They did
so, and returned at their leisure to the public building. They found
it still silent and unoccupied. Then a man came along who told
3 Memoir I, p. 16.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFGUCiijV_L6Sx69Y2b_qmkPgfeJLQWC5bWc3Vq2dfcU0oY0pq6jzL7J5sCO31TX6pZGHxeoIt1E4cgb8Vv17LgzXtCdFHQZMfw77H8Ne_46kHVaHqBmVrQ4JxADdHhTIF_YV898A=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima ioi
them that the Administration had moved to another house on
another street. A few minutes later they were standing in the
presence of the local cacique and several of his henchmen.
The dark nervous eyes of Arturo de Oliveira Santos took in the
three dusty figures.
“And the boy?” he asked abruptly.
“What boy?” So the Administrator did not know that there
were three children! Ti Marto played for time. He finally remem¬
bered that he had a son, but pretended that he had not under¬
stood that the great man wanted to see him.
“Besides, Senhor Administrator,” he added, “it is three leagues
from here to our country, and children can’t stand walking so
far, and they’re not safe on a horse or a burro, for they’re not
used to it.” v
So at least he now remembers the conversation. “And I had
a good mind to tell him something more: ‘Two children of that
age in court!’ But I kept quiet.” 4
Santos angrily berated him for his negligence, and Antonio for
for being late. Then he turned brusquely to Lucia. Had she seen
a lady at Cova da Iria? Who did she think it was? Was it true
that the lady had told her a secret? Well, then, Lucia must tell
the secret, and promise never to return to Cova da Iria.
Lucia looked straight ahead and said nothing.
“Will you tell me the secret?” he asked again.
“No.”
The Administrator glared at Antonio, who, sheepish and sleepy
as usual, had been standing with his hat in his hand, waiting.
“You there, do they believe these things over in Fatima?”
“Oh, no, sir!” said Lucia’s father. “All this is just women’s
tales.”
“And you, what do you say?” The Administrator was looking
at Ti Marto.
4 De Marchi, op. cit., p. iio.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHngYf3nucFeqXwjtjDbqdLehcuSMLT8jUrDu5GRq5NrGbn0YSyt4DMgAq4AalR4BcJNuXZ55Fx96yerWAkHlGU31mmahCXqmCIQ_B06dy1Xs3lg2g5vT4l52ZxXNhxABxEnH6B=w491-h810-v0
102 Our Lady of Fatima
“I am here at your command,” replied the father of Jacinta
and Francisco, “and my children say the same things I do/’
“Then you think it is true?”
“Yes, sir, I believe what they say.”
All the bystanders laughed heartily at this. Ti Marto regarded
them with unruffled composure. He was not afraid of these small
politicians. As for Santos, it was clear to him by this time that
nothing was to be gained by questioning these two clodhoppers
and their stolid