 many
breaches in the ancient walls, it is easy to herd the sheep from
one lot to another; besides, there are some large trees that give
a good shade.
From Valinhos the land rises rapidly southward, wall after wall,
to the top of a rugged hill called O Cabego, The Head. On the
crest of this was an antique windmill (still there, but shorn of its
wings) from which one had a magnificent view in all directions for
many miles. At the very top, on the southern side, runs a rather
irregular ledge from east to west. In one place the crag is hollowed
out into a partial cave, which gives some protection when rain
or a cold wind comes from the northwest. Scattered about, too,
were many boulders and chunks of gray granite. It was fun to
play among them or just to sit on them and watch the flocks
nibbling on the slope below. Farther down, the checkered land¬
scape spread out in three directions to vast ranges of mountains.
Just below, to the south, was a deep green valley from which
arose some tall pines that waved and moaned when the wind blew.
Beyond them, a few miles away, were several farms much larger
than those of Aljustrel. There one could almost always see some-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHzwEp9-UPqrF3HS5tXIJOi3U4xw5ejl-wCPi2ROvIPg4GLlsqFhXlqhRcPFrfA9CL0FeJJdmfWRFAHMNZNKziONn4OTKSDKkFn2ept_QSGhT1lpZzO83GoV3CMTbKRB_lziFdrww=w491-h810-v0
21 Our Lady of Fatima
thing interesting: men plowing or sowing or reaping, according
to the season, or threshing with the implements of a thousand
years ago. Or it was fun to watch, pn the far heights, the squarish
sails of old mills revolving and veering with the caprices of the
west wind. The range at the east was of a sterner sort, like a clump
of enormous rocks—from a plane, as a matter of fact, they seem
only a small part of one huge piece of calcareous gray that runs
for hundreds of miles the length of Portugal. At the other end of
the valley are some friendlier mountains, covered with greenery'.
It was thrilling to see all this from one place. And such a
pleasant place! Every'thing about Cabefo is clean, fragrant and
peaceful. The sunshine seems to laugh there all day long. The
wand howls overhead and does no harm. Up there it seems good
to breathe, to be alive, to be free.
Lucia began to enjoy her conversations with Teresa Matias and
the other girls, all the more as she discovered in herself a certain
ascendancy of intellect that could make them do whatever she
wished. Teresa, now' the mother of nine children, remembers that
it w'as Lucia who led m the dancing and singing, and taught them
new songs. One of these was in praise of Our Lady of Mount
Carmel, and began thus:
Name of Mary',
Oh! how' lovely!
Save my soul.
For it is yours!
Lady of Carmel
Bring me word
To pray three times
In blessing and praise.
In blessing and praise
I have to pray.
Lady of Carmel
Help me, do!
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHpaql120f2CPK1HuMt7aOI8IGG-JCR0JOHrCtXq2KIGoDi1DEMfHHw2hllsvvhDjK7d25pc6QPAYrQoPHWYPwY1NUIgC7prc5NilkLRKhx-7ya3NvGRGIlR34E_x1waFGlvMph6g=w491-h810-v0
In heaven three bows
To the weight of the cross,
Pray three times
Help me Jesus! Help me, Jesus!
Help me, Jesus! 8
One day Lucia and the three other shepherdesses were saying
the Rosary together after lunch among the rocks along the ridge
at Cabego, when one of them called attention to a strange white
something that was moving majestically from east to west, far
over the deep valley. As it approached them it came to a pause over
the pine grove, and remained suspended in the air for some little
time. Lucia remembers it as “a figure like a statue made of snow
which the rays of the sun had turned somewhat transparent.” It
seemed to have the form of a human being.
“What is that?” asked one of the girls.
“I don’t know,” said Lucia.
They continued the Rosary, their eyes still fixed upon the mysteri¬
ous Thing; and as they finished, it disappeared in the sunny air.
Lucia characteristically said nothing about this at home. Others
were not so reticent.3 4 The news finally got to Maria Rosa, and as
usual, she was curious.
“Look here!” she said to her daughter. “They say you’ve seen I
don’t know what! What was it you saw?”
“I don’t know,” replied Lucia. “It looked like somebody wrapped
up in a sheet. There were no eyes or hands on it.”
“Silly girls’ nonsense!” Maria Rosa made a gesture of disgust.
After some time, and at the very same place, the same thing hap¬
pened again. In fact it happened a third time during the summer
3 Op. cit., p. 45.
4 Senhora Maria da Freitas, a Portuguese ‘writer and daughter of a famous editor
of O Seculo, told me in the summer of 1946 that long before she had heard any¬
thing about the apparitions at Fatima, a woman of the district repeated to her an
apparently absurd tale brought home by her daughter, who said she and some others
had seen a “white man without any head floating in the air.”'
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE21Pw1pUVsmMGoOXmWMpnQzmTDz3RsgxXz6iDKiPtLUb8tt2TY8J35xcDVCFhVFaw-PFRq9YABURati3aFple_qGNlI75DE6yTEsTZ5p4sZeAsUYq1h6qsqYPQWB7VFQx5hmE2LQ=w491-h810-v0
of 1915, as nearly as Lucia can establish the date. Maria Rosa,
hearing the gossip, was a little more insistent in her questioning.
“Now let us see! What was it you say you saw over there?”
“I don’t know, Mother, I don’t know what it was.” 5
Neighbors began to twit Lucia about the apparition, and to
exchange knowing or pitying glances when she passed. Her older
sisters thought it had something to do with the abstraction they
had noticed in her since the day of her First Communion, and
often, when she seemed to be day-dreaming, one of them would
say:
“What’s the matter, Lucia? Have you seen somebody wrapped
up in a sheet?”
Lucia said nothing. What was the use of talking, when she
didn’t understand it herself?
5 Lucia herself tells about these apparitions in her second Memoir, p. 9, written
in 1937.
1
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFuNDX4FMkJvMaZvwgVy33Seq8VfD3f6EBARxQBEGv4CeNo8QD18qdqsTvrO0i9mU8nMNzR5ZltfpkhxZ9EhZH1IuDlEEAxJMeuuiPbXn5umAR1bF18olejahUN-JYt9LfPWdOqkQ=w502-h812-v0
CHAPTER III
Francisco and Jacinta were usually waiting for her at twilight
when she drove the sheep into the dusty patio at Aljustrel. The
boy was unconcerned, but the little girl would run to meet her,
bringing all the news. Every night it was the same. She had asked
her mother again to let her tend sheep with Lucia, and her mother
had refused. Jacinta took this very much to heart. If the evening
happened to be misty or cloudy, she was pensive to the verge of
tears. “The angels aren’t going to light their lamps tonight,” she
would say. “And Our Lady’s lamp hasn’t any oil in it.”
While she and Lucia inclosed the sheep for the night, Francisco
would sit on a stone in front of the Abobora cottage, and play a
tune on his ptfaro, a little wooden fife that he treasured. Then
he would follow them to the threshing floor near the well, and
watch with them until the stars began to come out. But he was
never as enthusiastic about this as he was about the rising and
the setting of the sun. “No lamp is as beautiful as Our Lord’s!”
he would insist, and any manifestation of the power of that lamp
delighted him beyond measure. The glint of sunlight on drops of
dew or on the gilded surface of a pond, the ruddy glare of late
afternoon on the windows of houses in an neighboring village—-
anything of this sort was enough to make him cheerful for the
rest of the day. How did it happen that this little peasant, whose
parents could not read or write, invariably saw in the sun (like
Saint Athanasius and Saint Patrick centuries before) a symbol of
the Word of God redeeming the human race?
Considering his age there was a great deal of the detachment
and serenity of the saints in Francisco. With all his courage and
fortitude, he was peaceful and gentle by nature, and seemed to
have a precocious sense of how little the mere things of this world
24
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHsR1bc_dmeEXj-OVAH3kTruV1T7g6Jb-ftrkyBdgIyfbxK-edEKtC-Fq_eXnWnljzq-du18FzonF5KSVPOZi4GJ2T4H-GVusDKBeSim99Gl5gbYjdxqr1EdFxOUlGpNTFJx6vTBg=w502-h812-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 25
amount to. He would not put himself to the trouble of fighting
even for what belonged to him. If another boy grabbed his win¬
nings in a game, he would say, “Do you think I care? Keep it.”
One day he went to Lucia’s house and showed her and some
other children a new handkerchief that had been given him. He
was very proud of this, arid with reason, for it was well made
and had a picture of Our Lady embroidered upon it in bright
colors. It passed from hand to hand, amid exclamations. Then,
mysteriously, it vanished. When at length someone discovered
it in the pocket of a certain boy, he insisted that it was his, and
struggled to keep it. Francisco was strong enough to take it from
him by force. Instead, he shrugged. “Keep it, then. What does
a handkerchief matter to me?”
This indifference was his chief defect, in Lucia’s opinion, and
was probably the reason why other children did not care much
to play with him. Lucia sometimes found it so irritating that she
would tell him to sit on a stone and keep quiet. Francisco would
obey without a word. What did he care? He could always enter¬
tain himself. Usually he would take his fife from his pocket and
begin to play softly on it.
He had no real desire to be a shepherd. It was Jacinta who
wanted to do everything that Lucia did. Yet Francisco loved his
little sister more than he did his brother Joao. And because he
preferred her company, he used to second her pleadings with a
persistence foreign to his nature, until Olimpia sharply told him
to hold his peace.
“It doesn’t matter, Mother,” he said quietly. “It was Jacinta
who wanted to go.”
A very different person was the capricious and wilful Jacinta,
so much so, adds Lucia, that no one would ever have suspected
they were brother and sister, had they not resembled each other
so noticeably, with their dark brown eyes, their well-spaced fea¬
tures, their firm comely mouths, the curve of their cheeks. But
in temperament, no. The desires of Francisco were few and easy
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGKJVOalZhOp6vg2EOVfNcit-H3xgRKyPHuT6WDFECeEj23U6zIOknZ2cf2ewkW9GWHYvyKPTvFkZclKkWtJrkmaIhBfP0wyoiU44K84IPdv8MrvJEwFeScnuOxkPBsJdGmdfEi=w491-h810-v0
26 Our Lady of Fatima
to satisfy. Jacinta wanted everything, and with a passionate in¬
sistence. When she made up her mind to be a shepherdess with
Lucia, she gave her mother no rest. Yet Olimpia, too, was a strong
woman.
Jacinta’s dearest ambition was to make her First Communion.
If Lucia had received at six, why not she? Whenever there was a
new Communion class, the older girl would go with her sister
Maria to receive again and to renew her devotion to the hidden
Jesus. On one such occasion they took Jacinta along. She was
enchanted with everything, most of all with the tiny girls who,
attired as angels, fairly showered the Sacred Host with flowers.
The next time they were in the meadows, she made a garland
and placed it on Lucia’s head.
“Why do you do that, Jacinta?”
“I do as the angels do. I give you flowers.”
Jacinta seemed to have reached the pinnacle of happiness when
she was given a place at last among the “angels” in a Corpus
Christi procession. Yet when Lucia and the other girls cast their
offerings at the Host, she was seen to stand still, staring at Father
Pena.
“Jacinta,” asked Maria afterwards, “why didn’t you throw the
flowers at Jesus?”
“Because I didn’t see Plim.”
“You should have done as Lucia did.”
Jacinta said afterwards to Lucia:
“Then you saw the little Jesus?”
“No. But don’t you know that the little Jesus of the Host
Whom we never see is hidden, and that we receive Him in
Communion?”
“And when you receive Communion do you talk with Him?”
“I talk.”
“And why don’t you see Him?”
“Because He is hidden.”
“I am going to ask my mother to let me go to Communion, too!”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH52YsZ9XemcEPQ8znd8AzmzVP1WyYewcjw81p666UInXXNe9wuhAyDvzObz31peE-tDSZt5N904mzgpUzFxRJCzwWdgM9aZwT-pW25qFUxj2kHtlSRQW-z5Dh5Rxk3JmZTKt6Q=w491-h810-v0
27 Our Lady of Fatima
“The Prior won’t let you till you are ten.”
“But you aren’t ten, and you go to Communion.”
“Because I knew all the doctrine, and you don’t know it.”
Thus Lucia became the teacher of a very apt pupil, who was
not content to learn by rote, but wanted to know the reason for
everything.
“How can so many people at the same time receive the little
hidden Jesus?” she would ask. “And how can there be a niece
for each one?”
“Don’t you see that there are many Hosts, and that the Little
One is in each one?” And Lucia tried to explain the mystery of
the multiplication of the body of Him who had multiplied the
loaves and fishes, and had made all things. It was not long, how¬
ever, before she came to the end of her knowledge, and began
to repeat herself.
“Teach us more things,” Jacinta would say, encouragingly, “for
we know all these things now.”
Jacinta managed to persuade her mother that she knew enough
catechism to be examined by the Prior, and Senhora Olimpia
finally took her to the church.
Father Pena asked her a great many questions. At the end he
looked grave and said he feared the child was too young; besides,
she did not know enough doctrine.
Poor Jacinta! How she grieved! Yet it was not her nature to
brood over past defeats when there were other victories to be
gained; and if life brought her some disappointments, they were
soon forgotten. One day she ran to Lucia’s house with great and
evident joy, Francisco following more sedately.
“Guess what? My mother is going to let us tend the sheep!”
It was true, Olimpia had yielded at last. And from then on
Francisco and Jacinta, like Lucia, could be seen early in the morn¬
ing prodding a woolly flock that almost filled the narrow road
—Francisco in his long trousers, with a staff and a tasseled stocking
cap such as the shepherds of the Serra still wear, Jacinta with a
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEwKCqw7xQTw0ENuNtojysT0WobbtiAr5ExaNtefp2NILGqS1msVtcfonzQd5vb-FrqVawxjyC2mv4Tq-MsfHfwh6z0NaKz0acpsxBrAOCbAteptubCCQ5BG6T4L33I_Q3zBs0wCA=w491-h810-v0
gray checked waist and a black skirt that fell to her ankles, and
a kerchief over her dark hair. At the barreiro (mud hole) they
would wait for Lucia, while the sheep nosed into the brackish
water; or if Lucia arrived there first, she would wait for them.
Then the three, all barefoot as a rule, would proceed together
behind the combined flock of some twenty-five or more sheep,
with now and then a goat or two, until they came to some place
where there was good grazing.
Jacinta liked to walk in the midst of the flock. Sometimes she
would pick up one of the smallest and whitest lambs and carry it
wrapped about her neck.
“Why do you do that, Jacinta?”
“To do as Our Lord does,” she replied, referring to a holy
picture someone had given her, with an image of the Good
Shepherd on it. But when they reached their destination in some
pasture, she was ready for any sort of game or frolic.
Sometimes they would spend the whole day at Cova da Iria.
Sometimes they would play at Valinhos. Their favorite place was
the rock-strewn hill called Cabego, where the cave on the prop¬
erty of Lucia’s godfather Anastasio offered so many opportunities
for fun, and so extensive and beautiful a view.
Jacinta never tired of chasing the small white butterflies that
flitted all day in the warm sweet air on the hillside and along the
ridge. If there was anything she liked better than that, it was
to pick the wild flowers that grew in great variety and profusion
among the scattered rocks. There was a small blossom of brilliant
blue that dotted the fields everywhere about Cabego, and it was
not difficult to find wild mint, because it was so fragrant, particu¬
larly if it had been crushed by some passing foot. Indeed, there
were so many delightful odors combined and flung across the
valley by the strong west wind, that it was hard to say just what
they were. One could usually distinguish, even above the scent
of mint or the aroma from the tall pines in the deep valley below,
the more pungent fragrance of a dwarf variety of wild rosemary
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGOoT4q1MqMXmZj7LQmgFEey4jpI9Z-yu5jAif7JfuvC4RjFKJXWs4tEKXiMISCCfvxXUp6QZGM0_xyTuRIYr8SKnRc7ZfnEU1AlmaAyzJBbGJbXv1BdFP3tQssWThGi_ALP-op=w491-h810-v0
that the Portuguese call the alecrim. They have a popular song
about it that recalls the “rosemary—that’s for remembrance” of
Ophelia:
“Quern pelo alecrim passou
E um raminho nao tirou.
Do sen amor se nao lemhrou.” 1
Rose of the sea—Mary’s rose—rose of Mary, star of the sea—
this humble variety of rosemary still grows everywhere about
Cabefo, as if in memory of Jacinta.
Like all children she was fascinated by the discovery of the
echo; and as the echoes at Cabejo happen to be very clear, loud’
and deliberate, she and her companions would shout for an hour
at a time across the rustling crests of the pines, and listen with
delight for the slow return of their voices from the opposite hill.
All kinds of names, jingles and jibbensh passed and repassed by
that mysterious agency that the Greeks imagined to be a nymph.
But Jacinta was especially fond of the repercussions of the word
“Maria.” Sometimes she would say the whole Ave Maria, pro¬
nouncing each word only after the previous one had stopped re¬
verberating:
“Ave . . . Maria . . . cheia . . . de grapa . . . /”
Sometimes all three would join in this sport, and then it seemed
as if the whole Serra da Aire resounded with the words spoken
by Gabriel two thousand years ago:
“Blessed ... art .. . thou . . . among . . . women!”
What Jacinta liked best of all, however, was to dance. She was.
very graceful, and she knew it; nothing seemed to satisfy the
restless energy of her* mind and body so much as flinging her arms
and