 the strangers fanning out on either side of her. I felt very
very bitter that day,’l she remembers, for the disdain and contempt
of her mother and sisters had cut her to the heart. “I recalled the
times that were past, and I asked myself where was the affection
which my family had had for me only a little while ago.” And
now to be followed through the village by all these impertinent
strangers, who asked her a thousand questions! Sne began to weep
as she walked along. Her face was wet with tears when she stopped
at the Marto house.
“Don’t cry!” said jacinta, when she saw the red eyes and
quivering lips. “Surely these must be the sacrifices that the Angel
said God was going to send us. That is why you suffer and to
make reparation to Him, and to convert sinners!
Lucia dried her eyes, and the three, followed by the strangers,
walked briskly down the main road and over the fields for half
an hour or more. At Cova da Iria they found awaiting them another
group of devout or curious persons from hamlets far and near.
There was a woman from Loureira, a little man from Lomba de
Equa, others from Boleiros, Torres Novas, Anteiro; and Maria
Carreira and her daughters from Moita. There must have been
at least fifty. Maria Carreira is one of many reliable witnesses who still live
near the scene; it was there, in fact, that I spoke with her in the
summer of 1946, for she is the caretaker of the shrine and is known
as Maria da Capelinha. A widow of seventy-five, always dressed
neatly in black with a kerchief of the same color over her white
hair, she looks younger than she is, for she is straight, slender,
and quick in her motions. She has the serenity of one who has
nothing more to ask of life; her blue-gray eyes are calm, honest,
searching, intelligent. She remembers clearly how she happened
to be at Cova da Iria on that Feast of Saint Anthony, 1917. She
had been planning it for weeks. Two or three days after the May
apparition, her husband had been working with Antonio Abobota,
the father of Lucia, weeding a garden, and he came home with a
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH5rmxjFepGd6LYdh_UIKrw80Y62g5TLrxUQ2zuu-JJMmj1CF0WegaxjzfV516mSm02lUahzuhAPBlvf_Okvlp1S1RebRxATteadkea24lfZiKwaM_HMXs1pdtrZlGqfamysTlUrw=w491-h810-v0
strange tale. Antonio had told him that Our Lady had appeared
at Cova da Iria to his youngest daughter and to two of the children
of his sister Olimpia, who was married to Ti Marto. Carreira
thought it was crazy nonsense. But his wife took it seriously. Their
son John was a cripple, hunch-backed, with knees that crossed and
knocked together as he walked. Maria clutched at the thought
that it might be true, and that Our Lady might return the follow¬
ing month and cure the lad.
As soon as Lucia reached the place, according to the story Maria
Carreira told Father De Marchi (and confirmed to me last summer)
she stopped about nine feet from an azinheira, facing east, with
Jacinta on one side of her and Francisco on the other. Presently
they all sat down to wait, for it was not quite noon, and the crowd,
too, began to relax. Some opened their wicker baskets and drew
forth loaves of bread and bottles of wine. A few offered the
children bits of food, which they declined, though they did accept
oranges, holding them in their hands. Jacinta began to, play,
until Lucia told her to stop. A girl from Boleiros commenced to read
in a loud voice from a prayer book.
Maria Carreira, who had been ill, felt faint from standing.
“Will Our Lady delay much longer?” she inquired.
“No, Senhora, not very long,” replied Lucia, scanning the
eastern sky.
They all said five decades of the Rosary. This done, the pious
girl from Boleiros started the Litany of Our Lady. Lucia inter¬
rupted her, remarking that there would not be time. Then, arising
from the ground, she cried,
“Jacinta, there comes Our Lady! There is the light!”
The three children then ran to the azinheira, and the crowd
closed in behind them. Maria Carreira still remembers the details
of the scene with some vividness: “We knelt on the bushes and
the gorse. Lucia raised her hands as if in prayer and I heard her
say, ‘Your Excellency told me to come here, please say what you
want of me.’ Then we began to hear something like this, some-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHenyReCvAigyHYuTQRMfjLFfi4uz4Mtzyd0Yku2WkjG194jAasTkT2xg7mK_F8Zcj_siDNta0I5MiLWZrL8K9bsDshqwpLDGh_B-3KUqLkcY4YHVvaM_6keE71iDnEYPfd0wIaoQ=w491-h810-v0
thing like a very faint voice, but we could not understand what
it was saying. It was like the buzzing of a bee.” 1
Some of the bystanders noticed that the light of the sun seemed
■dimmer during the following minutes, though the sky was cloud¬
less. Others said that the top of the azinheira, covered with new
growth, appeared to bend and curve just before Lucia spoke, as if
under a weight.
In Lucia’s own artless but telling account, she asked, ‘‘What
does Your Excellency want of me?” substantially as in the story
of Maria Carreira. The Lady replied:
“I want you to come here on the thirteenth day of the coming
month, to recite five decades of the Rosary 2 every day, and to
learn to read. I will tell you later what I want.”
Lucia then asked for the cure of a certain sick person.
‘‘If he is converted, he will be cured during the year,” was the
reply.
“I should like to ask you to take us to heaven,” continued the
child.
“Yes, Jacinta and Francisco I will take soon. But you remain
here for some time more. Jesus wishes to make use of you to have
me acknowledged and loved. He wishes to establish in the world
the devotion to my Immaculate Heart.”
“I stay here?” Lucia was in dismay. “Alone?”
“No, daughter. And do you suffer a great deal? Don’t be dis¬
couraged. I will never forsake you. My Immaculate Heart will
be your refuge and the road that will conduct you to God.”
With these last words she opened her hands, as she had on the
previous occasion, and again communicated to them the light that
streamed in two rays from her palms, enveloping the children in
its heavenly radiance.
1 De Marchi, op. cit., p. 78.
2 The word Our Lady used, according to Lucia, was "terqo," meaning “a third”
—that is, five of the fifteen decades of the Rosary.
In addressing Lucia, alone, Our Lady always used the tender singular form, "/«"
—“thou”—instead of the formal “you.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFaTTQgcMxoo8lL65NTtvJXvBGp3jxB-_wO_TkrT3om5-tkrBGQEqxsuxEZlzx8rS2REfuKs8PhRN5vKI0ZrdxRtT-LGIGRO75Av8RuHYx_34yea8WuLUhNoQkw8zjBP-v27a8h=w491-h810-v0
“In it we saw ourselves as if submerged in God,” wrote Lucia.
“Jacinta and Francisco seemed to be in the part of this light that
went up toward heaven, and I in that which spread itself over
the ground. Before the palm of the right hand of Our Lady was
a Heart encircled by thorns which seemed to have pierced it like
nails. We understood that it was the Immaculate Heart of Mary
outraged by the sins of humanity, for which there must be
reparation.” 3
The Immaculate Heart of Mary! The Angel had said some¬
thing about that. “Through the infinite merits of His Most Sacred
Heatt and of the Immaculate Heart of Mary, I beg of You the
conversion of sinners.” Now the children saw both Jesus and Mary
in that vision of the Most Blessed Trinity that enfolded them.
Our Lady seemed neither sad nor joyful, but always “serious”;
but the impression left by the Word of God, on the mind of
Francisco, at any rate, was one of infinite sadness.
As this tremendous revelation faded from their view, the Lady,
still surrounded by the light which emanated from her, arose
without effort from the little tree, and glided swiftly toward the
east until she could be seen no longer. Some of the people standing
around noticed that the new leaves on the top of the azinheira
were drawn in the same direction, as if the Lady’s garments had
been trailed across them, and it was several hours before they
gradually returned to their usual position.
Lucia remained looking at the vast emptiness of the sky. Maria
Carreira heard her say, “Pronto! Now she can’t be seen any more.
Now she is entering heaven. Now the doors are being shut.”
The people were intensely excited. Though none of them had
seen the Lady, it was evident that something extraordinary had
occurred. Some began to ask questions of the children, others to
3 Memoir IV, pp. 37-38. The revelation of the Immaculate Heart devotion has
been called “the June secret” in some accounts. Lucia has explained that Our Lady
did not ask to have it kept secret. Something within them made the children keep
it secret for die time being.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE24azj8lYO7Quq1GHPOyD3L7kVyYFJ-fI4PbxxAa1sFk-BqupLZhqPZoPe9zVHXmkQNozkCs2iqHYpWkaX1FOmbpaSoCniW59rIq7DOn7f2PrnomaoPbFGuDEzemzVftBnow4OTw=w491-h810-v0
71 Our Lady of Fatima
dispute among themselves. Many were examining the azinheira
and exclaiming over the dislocation of the new growth. A few
were plucking the top leaves for relics or souvenirs, and there
would probably have been nothing left of the poor bush if Lucia
had not had presence of mind to ask them to take only the lower
ones, which Our Lady had not touched. Maria Carreira was gather¬
ing some of the rosemary which grew all about, filling the air
with its sharp fragrance; she was already thinking of setting up
an altar or shrine on the spot.
“Let’s say the Rosary!” said someone. “No, the Litany,” cried
another. “We have to say the Rosary on the way home.” Reciting
one or the other, they broke up into small groups and moved off
slowly in various directions.
It was not until about four o’clock that Lucia and her com¬
panions were able to set out for Aljustrel, followed by a few of
the more curious spectators, who still pestered them with questions
and supplications. Some of them were inclined to be flippant.
“So Our Lady didn’t say anything to you this time, Jacinta?”
No reply.
“What’s this, Francisco, are you still here? Didn’t you go to
heaven?”
“What did she say to you, Lucia? Come now, tell us.”
The children resented this sort of questioning. They were still
somewhat dazed from their experience; it was not easy to turn their
thoughts back to everyday affairs. To some they gave laconic
answers. To others none at all. Most commonly they would say,
“It’s a secret. I can’t talk about it.” Finally the last of the strangers
became discouraged and took themselves off, leaving them in peace.
Francisco had many questions of his own to ask when they
were alone. As on the first occasion in May, he had seen all that
Jacinta and Lucia had seen, but had heard nothing that the Lady
said—only the voice of his cousin. And even after they had ex¬
plained everything to him, he was still puzzled about many details,
especially about the reference to the Immaculate Heart. Yes, he
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGt85XyJirmhzT8V1MY6j410sGAma0SnkXSeP0wePEc7L6cR155JSbrEu5aRoOJYIzswICZxzQ7j5uO3VwNqPthYPRe8_Dys4CvuwOtiNc0oy6QY7xfU0I3ESyuVLs1Gp5LqQnRHg=w491-h810-v0
72 Our Lady of Fatima
had seen the Heart, and could not forget the rays of light from
the Lady’s hands, which he had felt penetrating his own breast.
“But why was Our Lady with a Heart in her hand,” he per¬
sisted, “scattering on the world such a great light that is God?
You were with Our Lady in the light I saw on the ground, Lucia.
And Jacinta and I were going up toward the sky.”
“It’s this way,” said Lucia. “You and Jacinta are soon going to
heaven, and I stay with the Immaculate Heart of Mary for some
time longer on earth.”
“How many years will you stay here?”
t “I don’t know. Plenty.”
“Was it Our Lady who said so?”
“It was. And I saw it in that light that struck us in the breast.”
“That’s right,” put in Jacinta. “I saw that too.” 4
“I am going to heaven soon!” said Francisco. And from then
on he often said it ecstatically. “Jacinta and I are going to heaven
soon! Heaven! Heaven!”
The two younger children ran home full of joy, while Lucia,
more thoughtful, went on her way alone to her own house.
When Jacinta and Francisco burst in, Ti Manuel and his Olimpia
had just returned from the fair with two fine fat oxen, with which
they were well pleased. Other members of the family had been at
the festivities at Fatima. But the two youngest children became the
center of attention the moment they appeared' in the doorway.
“We saw the Lady again, Mother!” cried Jacinta, “and she told
me that I am going to heaven soon!”
“Nonsense!” said Olimpia. “What Lady?”
“The beautiful Lady. She came again today.”
“Beautiful?” repeated one of the family. “Is she as pretty as
So-and-so?”
“Much, much prettier!”
“Is she as pretty as that saint in the church with so many stars
4 Memoir IV, pp. 9-10.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFOqFlBRrw3KXbNZbClzjZTqmOPYRHR_gRk6nI4zFUAghL-y4IM9UdqncmRHig9Nnx-z4iMSF3u5-ziIrJY2DTMHTwc1zQehNPn1ft4vwJ5NBiRHuojRXZqqx8QzRmwSrn6AjRgpA=w491-h810-v0
on her mantle?” demanded another, referring to the image of
Saint Quiteria at Saint Anthony’s.
“No! Much, much prettier!”
“As pretty as Our Lady of the Rosary?”
“Much more yet!”
“Well, what did she tell you this time?”
“To say the Rosary, and to go again every month till October.”
“Is that all?”
J'acinta felt perhaps that she had said too much already. “The
rest is a secret.”
“Oh, a secret! A secret! Tell us the secret!”
But nothing could persuade either of the children to do that.
Ti Marto has often chuckled over this conversation. “All the
women wanted to know what the secret was,” he reminisces. “But
I never asked them. A secret is a secret, and it has to be kept.” 5
Lucia meanwhile was being received by a much more skeptical
and less cordial audience. Her insistence that Our Lady had ap¬
peared to her a second time made no impression on a family
already convinced that she had become an unconscionable liar. It
fanned the holy indignation of Maria Rosa, on the contrary, almost
-to the combustion point. To think that fifty persons had made fools
of themselves by going to Cova da Iria, and all on account of her
good-for-nothing Lucia, who was bringing her so fast to her grave!
During the next few days Maria Rosa became yet more exas¬
perated, if possible. Almost every gossip she knew brought her
evidence of the tremendous sensation her daughter had caused,
even in the remotest corners of the Serra. Most of the witnesses
had believed in the apparition. Hence the news had been scattered
profusely in all directions and, although many still doubted, nothing
else was talked of.
The last straw was when Lucia ventured to ask her mother to
send her to school, since the Lady had told her to learn to read.
5 De Marchi, op. cit., p. 84.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGlHt5MzaIWDv-awUVeKihgbAgW_dcC-XjC1cFHQEUppLjNH0IFE8IwGy1dln0gfEjVi6xP_VjIMhI8LJ4WAcfzC_Fu1hrFLNSmDYQflUPPUv3EX-aZ3KSvXbMUvxA29oZDg97SFA=w491-h810-v0
74 Our Lady of Fatima
“School, indeed!” said Maria Rosa with withering sarcasm. “A
lot it matters to Our Lady whether the likes of you can read and
write!”
Fortunately perhaps for her health of mind and spirit, Maria
Rosa bethought herself in good time of what the pastor, Father
Ferreira, had said.
“Tomorrow,” she said, “we are going again to see the Prior.
And this time you are going to tell him the truth!”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFt_HZodMzBOuyQ3p1hTN5JRnd5RVsBliNfvpiz9PzqmI33WQgbLTZw9M3BVSAOw7wRfSJtJv7PRrvhGXGaqKV5Sfx8QUl-Do2kMWi6ky9gppYDuHTUCaAi0TXduwtxL8arlIC9IQ=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER VIII
Early next morning the two set out for Fatima, Maria Rosa
stalking grimly ahead until they came to the Marto cottage.
There she paused to unburden her heart to Ti Olimpia, and
Lucia, weeping bitterly, had a few furtive words with Jacinta.
“Don’t cry!” said the younger girl. “I will call Francisco, and
while you are gone we will pray for you.”
Lucia dried her tears and followed her mother up the hill to the
church of Saint Anthony. Not once did Maria Rosa glance behind,
not a word did she mutter. In her black dress, black kerchief and
dark shawl she was as silent and ominous as an executioner. Her
bare feet fell with deadly precision on the stones of the winding
road. Even her sloping shoulders and dumpy form suggested iron
resolution that morning.
Before going to the rectory, Maria Rosa entered the church to
hear Mass. This respite was some relief to her daughter. As she
knelt before the uplifted Host and Chalice, the poor child offered
all her sufferings to Him who had suffered so much for men.
“You will have much to suffer.” How well the Lady had known!
The Mass over, Lucia followed her mother out of the church
and across the parched and trampled field to the house of the
Paroco.
It was not until she was halfway up the flight of some fifteen
or more steps, leading to the rectory porch, that Maria Rosa deigned
to give any sign that she was aware of her daughter’s miserable
existence. Turning abruptly, she said over her shoulder:
“Don’t annoy me any more! Tell the Prior now that you lied,
so that on Sunday he can say in the church that it was a lie, and
end the whole thing before all the people go running to Cova
da Iria to pray in front of a holm oak bush!” 1
1 Memoir II, p. 15, 1937.
75
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH1WP0nmisVS2tDTbBpnpIP634PTqa3XgRDIX_0ZdUZZAu-KiEVpKFukbLgOkg97ldzB52GlqZBbFq81D8l2ljQgnJ3lGjBiJ3u9CN-hKjl8e_zqbj_hRrBhXPA5gi5DTys-ncg5Q=w491-h810-v0
Father Ferreira received them with grave courtesy, and asked
them to sit on a bench and wait for a few moments. After a while
he invited Lucia to step into his study, where he proceeded to
ask her many many questions, very minute questions—“I am
almost tempted to say boring questions,” she added when she
came to write the story twenty years later—but always with kind¬
ness and delicacy. He had already examined Jacinta and Francisco.
He was comparing all the answers in his mind. And at the end
he seemed convinced that the children had told the truth about
what they had seen and heard. Yet his conclusion was even more
alarming, in a way, than if he had convicted them of lying.
“It doesn’t seem to me like a revelation from