 we may be sure Maria Carreira put in her two cents’
worth when the mustard of zealous resentment stuck in her sharp
nose. No priest was there to arbitrate, and it took some time to
find one who would bless the hermitage.1
Jacinta was amused, then pensive:
“I will never see Cova da Iria or Vahnhos again,” she said.
“Yes, you will, Jacinta. Courage!”
“No. Our Lady told me that my mother would take me to a
hospital in a dark building and that I would not get well.”
1 Maria Carreira, in De Marchi, p. 205.
*73
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGA5nH064Xb6WeRBzfwFG8MzOQ-y_EDqwbbbIl1_LjJnwRwdSGeS9wv4mqLkwYfnlfs7KHZcGlEUwiYhaZpkX4skO0f_5sBG0OTg5wjaBACfHGQVKrsZ30lm6qv75F_z_nUNp-ymQ=w491-h810-v0
174 Our Lady of Fatima
It was true that pleurisy took a long time to heal. Yet it seemed
that sick people could help others even while they lay helpless
themselves. There was Lucia’s Aunt Victoria, for instance, whose
brilliant but erratic son was missing for weeks, until Jacinta began
asking Our Lady to send him home. Then after a few days he
suddenly returned, with a strange story suggesting something
like bilocation on the part of the young invalid. Having spent
all his money, he had resorted to theft, had been arrested, and
had been thrown into jail at Torres Novas. One night he managed
to escape. He fled to the mountains and hid himself in a pine
forest. Frightened during a violent thunderstorm, he fell on his
knees in the rain and asked God’s forgiveness and a safe return
home. Presently a little girl came out of the darkness and took
him by the hand, and he saw that it was Jacinta. She led him
down the mountain to the road that runs from Alqueidao to
Reguengo; then, making a sign that he should continue that way,
she vanished. At dawn he came to a bridge that he recognized
as being near Boleiros, not far from his home in Fatima. When
Lucia questioned Jacinta, the child could never explain, but said
she had prayed a great deal for the young man.2
When the warm weather brought no improvement in Jacinta’s
condition, the doctor said she would never recover unless she went
to a hospital for an operation, for she had purulent pleurisy as a
result of the bronchial pneumonia; and one morning in July
(1919) Ti Marto placed her on the back of a burro and took her
to Ourem. The hospital there was a large white, rather cheerful
building, and the ward where Jacinta was put to bed was bright
and airy. This could hardly be the dark place where Our Lady
had said her mother would take her.
Olimpia went to see her there, however, and found her cheerful
and uncomplaining, even when some delicacies that a visitor had
brought had vanished from the top drawer of the medicine cabinet.
2 Memoir IV, p. 45.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF4nCEoEOjPcCRa3GoDUEcd1CT1dOu1ZcuDrR4_kRRleCwMN7oJavxAJp6rVDhfMoQzGfDGThau91RIGdiFQrLjlTUVTbhtusphZqp2OMq5nNm_4uEgMT2ig_cgTzzle9eB47UB=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 175
“It was that glutton of a nurse,” said Olimpia. But Jacinta did
not care.
Lucia visited her only once. That was the summer when her
father died (July 31, 1919); she records the event briefly in her
memoirs without comment or emotion. Yet it seems likely enough
that all his family missed Antonio, for if he was not the best
husband and father in the world, he was not the worst, and it
was only “when he had a drop on him,” as Maria Carreira observed,
that he was inclined to be ill-tempered. Certainly Maria Rosa
grieved for him, and her health rapidly failed after his death.
She began to have alarming attacks of weakness and shortness
of breath which the physician attributed to her old heart ailment.
After one of these seizures Maria of the Angels said to her
youngest sister, “Look here, Lucia, you haven’t any father now,
and if your mother dies you will be an orphan. If it is true that
you saw Our Lady, ask her to cure your mother.”
The child arose without a word, went to her room, put on a
heavy woolen dress, for it was cold and rainy, and went to Cova
da Iria, to prostrate herself in the mud before the azinheira. When
she returned after a few hours, she brought a handful of red
earth, and told Gloria to make a tea of it. She had promised Our
Lady, she said, that if her mother was cured they would all go
on their knees from the highway to the place of the apparitions
for nine days in succession, and give food to nine poor girls. It
is Maria of the Angels who tells this curious story to Father De
Marchi:3
“Gloria prepared the tea and I gave it to mother.
“ ‘What tea is this?’ she asked.
“ ‘It is of violet blossoms,’ we said. And she drank all of it.”
There were no more heart attacks, though certain other infirmi¬
ties continued; and faithful to Lucia’s promise, she and all her
sisters went to Cova da Iria for nine evenings after supper, painfully
8 Op. cit., p. 218.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE7VleTIUr5Bco1ba_y94GAOw6GJ0NjWqzBJNkpEuUsOLR3_lZ7hG8vXAacr9sm9o93JO-uDZ_QAU53gyIUIx4zlyKJ7pOIWEC0Qu3HTO7xkBX1ERZpkCdtwTSEw78fHAY61ZnRTA=w491-h810-v0
.176 Our Lady of Fatima
hobbling down the stony slope on their knees while Maria Rosa
followed on foot, giving thanks to God.
Lucia was unable to obtain any such favor for her little friend
in the hospital at Ourem. An incision had been made and a drain
inserted; yet after two months Jacinta was no better—-in fact
she was worse than ever. It was costing Ti Marto 1,200 reis, or
about $1.35 every day, and he had spent ail he could afford. At
the end of August he hitched up the burrita again, and brought
the invalid home.
Ai, Jesus! Olimpia hardly knew her child, she was so thin, pale,
transparent, emaciated. There was a great open wound in her chest
that had to be dressed every day. Dr. Formigao, who saw her in
October, described her as a living skeleton, her arms nothing but
bones, her face all eyes, her cheeks wasted by fever.
The good theologian was one of the 600 persons who went
to Fatima on the thirteenth of October that year, to celebrate the
second anniversary of the great miracle. That was the day when
the pilgrims were startled by twenty-one terrific explosions, one
after another, near the azinheira. But it was not an attack by the
enemy, as many feared. It was only a workman from Porto-de-
Mos who had fired a salvo of twenty-one bombs in honor of Our
Lady, to show her his gratitude for a favor unexpectedly granted
him.
There was no doubt that the peasants had taken the Fatima
devotion to their hearts. One small indication of this was the
growth of the fund of small coins left by the tree. By the summer
of 1918 the total was 357,000 reis or about $500. This continued
to be a torment to Maria Carreira, the unofficial custodian of
the shrine by common consent, all the more so when people began
to malign her, insinuating that she was feathering her own nest.
In vain she tried to get the Prior to accept the money, and in
vain he wrote the Patriarchate for instructions. At one time the
Administrator of Ourem summoned Maria’s husband to Ourem
to give an accounting. After the death of Antonio, Maria Rosa
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEdPSLrrwBNxCTEke5sSrcjhw6uYR1YFU3Lu0u3OCZEoMUUBEvHFiLBvLoc_GHEibLlc0a2WgkbszWKqLO60AILSHUgD4FOFHzEOBhu_p7FnGYJnMytb_rUFehcdfQy6Yv1Helj3Q=w491-h810-v0
sent her sons, as owners of the land at Cova da Iria, to demand that
Maria da Capelhina turn the fund over to a commission. Fortu¬
nately an appeal for arbitration was made to the Vicar of Olival,
Father Faustino Ferreira, who arranged a friendly agreement until
the money could be delivered to some diocesan authority. After
that Maria Rosa and Maria Carreira became bosom friends.
Another happy result was that Lucia found in the Vicar of Olival
a loyal friend and wise director.
It seemed to a few thoughtful men like him that the devotion
at Cova da Iria was already bringing blessings upon Portugal and
on the world. Not only had the war ended, but diplomatic rela¬
tions between Lisboa and the Holy See had been resumed in
July, 1918. And in December, 1919, Pope Benedict XV appealed
to all Portuguese Catholics to submit to the Republic as the
lawfully constituted authority, and to accept offices if they were
offered; while the beatification of Nuno Alvares, the victor of
Albujarrota, contributed much to the growth of good feeling.
Nevertheless the Government continued to persecute the Church
in many ways; and it never relented in its efforts to stamp out
the devotion at Fatima. Perhaps this partly explains why His
Eminence, Cardinal Mendes Belo, Patriarch of Lisboa, threatened
to excommunicate any priest who spoke in favor of the apparitions.
A strong and able man, he was inclined to think in terms of power,
of public opinion, of prudent expediency. Lie may have felt that
when relations between Church and State were improving, it
would be unwise to allow a new and untested devotion to dis¬
turb them.
Under these circumstances it took courage for Dr. Formigao
to befriend Jacinta. Unfortunately he was able to do no more at
this time than suggest that she ought to he sent to some really
good sanitarium. Neither he nor Ti Marto had the means of
accomplishing this, and he returned to Santarem feeling unhappy
and helpless.
During the warm days of autumn, however, Jacinta began to
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFSrpTyYsKvSu2p1yckk_qANQx6sCWdE1aNciNZV-haJKXXJ8A5X0fYloj28YVCgo_X1_8UHCNvxtYiWSb7nvO_dciT-7LfltQRxif75ESvofRfMAkNh5etqCv0xRnARCU3bHlyAA=w491-h810-v0
178 Our Lady of Fatima
improve. She was able to leave her bed, then to go outdoors, and
finally to attend Mass at Fatima on Sunday. Once or twice she
went as far as Cova da Iria. When her parents learned of this
they put a stop to it, and none too soon. For with the first blast of
cold weather she became feverish again, and had to go back to
bed. This troubled her little so long as she was able to get up
and say her Rosary, kneeling in contemplation with her head
on the floor, as the Angel had done. But it gradually became
more difficult.
“When I am alone I get out of bed to say the prayers of the
Angel,” she confided to Lucia. “But now I can’t put my head on
the floor any more, because I fall. So I pray only on my knees.”
When Father Faustino Ferreira heard this from Lucia, he told
Jacinta that she must say all her prayers lying down in bed.
“And Our Lord will be content?” she asked anxiously.
“Yes, Our Lord wants yoil to do what the Vicar orders.”
“All right. I won’t get up any more.”
Even in bed Jacinta continued to do penance for some of those
hale and hearty sinners whom she had never seen. When thirsty
she would go without a drink. She would refuse some grapes for
which her mouth watered. Or she would lie awake wanting to
get up and pray, and offering up the desire as a penance rather
than disobey her mother; and this conflict would keep her awake
all night. It was only to Lucia that she revealed what a terrible
pain she had in her chest. But it was to honor the Immaculate
Heart of Mary.
“Tell all the people that God gives them graces through her,”
she said. “If I could only put in the heart of everybody that light
that I have here in my breast to burn me and make me love the
heart of Jesus and the heart of Mary so much! ... I don’t
know how it is, I feel Our Lord inside of me, I understand what
He says, and I don’t see or hear Him! But it is so good to be
with Him. . . . Look, do you know what? Our Lord is sad
because Our Lady told us not to offend Him any more because
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFZLa0Gxw6q039IX2uvfUMf0Rp5NzBxZLBSIoS93a1zw4K3Xt9eAg8F8g-80I100IXNjKsrhevp75ymtlhdB5oySlvr5bnYh1xjk_cBgMEVdkkjavWdo1N-sbKftTGY-PLsn3WJlg=w491-h810-v0
i?9 Our Lady of Fatima
He is much offended, and nobody pays any attention. They keep
right on doing the same sins.”
When Lucia came after Mass, Jacinta would say, “Did you
receive?”
“Yes.”
“Come over here near me, because you have in your heart the
hidden Jesus. Oh, I wish I could go to Communion!”
Yet three times during the year Jacinta saw her “little Mother
of Heaven” standing by her bed, encouraging her. The last of
these visions was late in December, 1919.
“Our Lady came to see me last night,” she reported joyfully.
“She told me that I am going to Lisboa, to another hospital. She
said that after I suffer a great deal I will die. I will die all alone.
But she told me not to be afraid, for she will come and find me
and take me to heaven.”
A little later, as certain implications became clear, Jacinta began
to cry, her bony hand clinging to her friend’s arm. “I’ll never see
you again, Lucia!”
“I’ll come to see you in the hospital.”
“No, you won’t come to see me. Look, pray for me, a lot, for
I die alone.”
One day when Lucia brought her a stamp with an image of
the Mother of Sorrows on it, she looked at it thoughtfully a
moment, and then cried, in anguish:
“Oh, my little Mother of Heaven, do I really have to die
alone?”
There was something heartbreaking in this, suggesting the awful
cry in the Garden, “Father, if it be possible . . .” Lucia too was
weeping as she clasped her in her arms and groped for words of
consolation.
“What do you care if you die alone, Jacinta, if Our Lady is
coming to take you?”
“It’s true, I don’t care. But I don’t know how it is, sometimes
I forget that she is coming to take me.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF3J9pHL9xDTTI8oX22P4ryoBKxcMVED9fs3A4uK0h_xyQptju6okbWZfOTOQOb83mCT7NbibRVDnrEZYh0T-Y5DbjdrJId2hnEaMMxWGBs16sAh-4ryZyfaFNT8Tky4xaOPKjYqw=w491-h810-v0
,180 Our Lady of Fatima
Olimpia had to get most of her information about her child’s
inner life from Lucia. “What did Jacinta say to you today?’’
she would whisper at the door. “Ask Jacinta what she is thinking
of when she has her hands over her face so long without moving.
I asked her, but she smiled and did not answer.”
When Lucia put the question, Jacinta replied, “I am thinking
of Our Lord and Our Lady and of (here she whispered part of
the secret). I like to think of them.”
This was little satisfaction to Olimpia, since the secret remained
untold. “The life of these girls is an enigma,” she complained
to Maria Rosa.
“It certainly is,” agreed Lucia’s mother tartly. “When they are
alone they talk in a corner and nobody can catch a word of what
they say, no matter how much they listen, and then when anyone
comes, they lower their heads and don’t say a word. I can’t under¬
stand this mystery.”
No one but Lucia took Jacinta’s talk about a hospital in Lisboa
seriously. Peasants could seldom afford hospitals, and Lisboa was
ninety miles away. It sounded like a delirious dream until one
day in January, 1920, when they saw an automobile stop in front
of the Marto cottage. The visitor was Dr. Formigao, and he had
with him a lady and gentleman whom he had interested in
Jacinta’s case, and who had come all the way from Lisboa to see
her—Dr. Enrico Lisboa, a noted specialist in ophthalmology, and
his wife. A brief examination convinced Dr. Lisboa that the child
would soon die if she were not sent to a good hospital. With his
connections in the capital he could easily arrange this. He and
some of his friends, including the Baron of Alvaiazere, would
take care of all the expenses.
Ti Marto and his wife objected that their daughter had been
worse after one hospital treatment, and that in any case it was
useless to attempt to prolong her life if Our Lady, as they believed,
had promised to come for her soon.
“The will of Our Lady,” replied the physician gravely, “is
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEtwDY80YmI6HPVF7JwFHTZimPuCZV20E-cwYtmJOg07RKzPFZwtKJ_8NS77OpAGNeO5kxQynq2OVJBu4QgOvpzEEUBo5SvVahWxicO_lBBW8jaOaejeKgYOe3wzryPXfML2t5S5Q=w491-h810-v0
superior to all human considerations. But the only way to make
sure that Our Lady does in fact wish to take her is to exhaust all
scientific means of preserving her life.”
It was decided, then, that Ti Olimpia should take her to Lisboa
as soon as the necessary arrangements could be made. Jacinta was
not surprised. She had been expecting something like this. And
for some reason she became notably better as the time for her
departure drew near. One fine January day, her mother and a
neighbor took her on the back of a burrita to Cova da Iria for a
farewell visit. At the Lagoa she asked to get down, and they all
said the Rosary. Then she picked some wild flowers, which she
carried to the place of the apparitions and laid in the little chapel
as an offering to Our Lady. She knelt by the azinheira to say a
last prayer. When the two women helped her to her feet again,
she looked about at the sky and the moor, and remarked:
“Mother, when Our Lady went away she passed over those
trees, and then she entered heaven so quickly that I thought they
must have pinched her feet in the door.” 4
Next morning she said goodby to her father and to her best
friend. “It cut me to the heart,” wrote Lucia. “I held her a long
time in my arms. She said to me, crying, ‘We shall never meet
again. Pray for me a lot till I go to heaven, and afterwards I’ll
pray a lot for you. Never tell anybody the secret even if they
kill you. Love Jesus and the Immaculate Heart of Mary a great
deal and make many sacrifices for sinners.’ ”
“Goodby, Jacinta.”
“Goodby, Lucia.”
Olimpia and her oldest son Antonio took Jacinta to Chao de
Magas, where they boarded a train for Lisboa, arriving four or
five hours later at the noisy and dusty station called Rossio. None
of them had ever been in the big city before. Olimpia carried a
4 Olimpia told this to Father De Marchi, op.