 his daughter Jacinta, and elbowed his way
to the edge of the crowd, the child clinging to his neck. Stragglers
followed them, still pelting them with questions. And Lucia and
Francisco kept saying:
“It’s a secret. It’s a secret.”
Someone offered to take them home in an automobile. Ti Marto
consented, and the children rode for the first time in one of the
strange horseless monsters they had seen occasionally rumbling
along the road from Ourem to Leiria. They were not in a mood to
enjoy a new experience. But they were grateful for the ride, for all
three were exhausted.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHC2Z8qfwx7ypJEUA8fGCyHTuNn_RKymqUuYznOXU5qdALhNUsfo_AAgAxMZCBpQtm8Ra7iz8wmMewxCDpaF2j1XuRLolGeLXjY3kymxvCYlUNXEVLROHlet9Ntxa7YnOsvyvyp6Q=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER IX
Everybody in Portugal seemed to have heard the news from
Fatima. Catholic diocesan papers began to publish short articles in
which a note of prudent reserve was evident; the headline of the one
in The Ouriense of Ourem, for example was, “Real Apparition or
Supposed Illusion.” More generous with its space if not with its
approval, was a secular press almost wholly and openly devoted to
the anti-Catholic revolution. Editors of the Jacobin tradition of 1789
flatly accused the clergy, and particularly the Jesuits, of having
invented the story to regain the prestige they had lost in the
Revolution of 1910. The anti-clerical O Seculo, chief daily of Lisboa,
printed a sarcastic and distorted account on July 21, under the
heading, “A Message from Heaven—Commercial Speculation?”
Liberals of a more moderate tinge wrote suavely of psychosis,
epilepsy and collective suggestion as possible explanations of the
incredible tale from the Serra da Aire. A casual reader of the daily
press might have concluded that the net result thus far had been to
provoke a new and bitter attack upon the Church.
If the illiterate children of Aljustrel and their families were
spared from all this, they could not escape so easily from hordes of
pilgrims, devotees, relic-hunters and mere sensation-seekers that
broke in more and more upon their peace. Some they were sorry for
:—poor wretches shattered by want or sorrow or some incurable
disease, who often walked barefoot over great distances, sometimes
completing the last mile on bleeding knees, to ask their prayers for
some favor, some cure from the Holy Virgin. They found it more
difficult to be patient with some of the rich and well-fed persons,
fashionably dressed and sporting furs and jewels, who would appear
suddenly in carriages or even in automobiles, some from as far as
Porto or Lisboa, either to beg some boon from heaven—for not
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHQIPHfjtMix3KMplK7mY8_SlfzwAKf0vPD33pqUsZVqHlkz_B6X5xh3pVTxrWbp-OJuuOZ0lNO3mlrvDzFPMyh2IOxsLAd3KJTftnrAtffJhwxcxbWd1Zypj6_c38luL3oySKohw=w491-h810-v0
even the rich are satisfied!—or to divert themselves with a new
marvel. Ti Marto remembers them well. “What questions they
would ask! Ai Jesus! Some of them were terrible. ‘Did Our Lady
also have goats and sheep when she was a little girl?’ ‘Did Our Lady
ever eat potatoes?’ What questions! It was a scandal, that’s what it 1 >» 1
was!
Francisco, like his father, resented the smug complacent stupidity
of the nabobs, and all the inquisitions and caresses to which they
subjected him. One day he turned on Jacinta, boylike, and said,
“It’s too bad you didn’t keep quiet! Then nobody would know it.
If it wasn’t a he,” he added regretfully, “we could tell all the people
we saw nothing, and that would be the end of it.”
After a while they began to develop a certain skill in avoiding
bores of the sleek and curious variety, who were so hard to shake off.
They could tell them at a glance from a distance. One day they
saw a group of fine ladies and gentlemen getting out of a motor
car on the road from Aljustrel to Fatima. There was no doubt
what they were, but it was too late to escape: the ladies had
already seen them and were approaching with smiles only too
familiar.
“Where do the little shepherds live? The ones that saw Our
Lady?”
The children gave the most precise directions to their homes.
The visitors thanked them, and went on down the hill, while the
three, giggling with triumph, tumbled over the wall and ran to hide
among the olive trees behind the Abobora cottage.
“We must always do this!” said Jacinta with great satisfaction.
There were many priests among the pilgrims at this period. And
most of them, despite the accusations of the anti-clerical press, were
skeptical and even hostile. Priests trained in theology were well
aware of the harm that fraud or delusion might do the Church, and
could ask a thousand clever questions that would never occur to
1 De Marchi, p. 104.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHl1fC9rsKBOfks8I3kHz9lNiTmnBTeH6W8zuC6etQzfrpeIY_6cVxOxoGDx9IhDWw7um0nXYqwoLIVZSlfCEBbIbc-Fjaf3I2GQXbaZj25vYPPW3sGM9SgfIfk6wzhWEyrRlYwjw=w491-h810-v0
one of the unbelieving skeptics. The mere sight of a black soutane
far down the road became a warning signal to be acted upon
instantly. “When we saw a priest coming, we always escaped if we
could,” wrote Lucia. “When we saw ourselves in the presence of a
priest, we prepared ourselves to offer to God one of our greatest
sacrifices.” ,
Fortunately there were exceptions. One of those they liked to
remember afterwards was the visit of the Jesuit Father Cruz, who
came all the way from Lisboa to investigate what he had heard.
Four years had passed since he had said to Lucia, at her first
confession, “My daughter, your soul is the temple of the Fioly
Spirit. Keep it always pure. ...” And though he was prematurely
old and bent almost double, he still went about, never carrying
money with him, preaching and directing souls, which he seemed
to read instantly with his small, shrewd benevolent eyes.2 After
questioning the children for some time, he persuaded them, as a
good detective might, to take him to the exact spot where they
had seen Our Lady, and to reenact for him all they had done and
said.
“On the way,” Lucia recalls, “we walked on each side of His
Reverence, who was mounted on an ass so small that his feet
almost dragged on the ground.” It was a long and painful journey
for him, and a tedious one, perhaps, for them, but it was worth
while, for he came away convinced that they had told the
truth. He taught them many ejaculatory prayers that proved use¬
ful and consoling. And from that day on he was their cham¬
pion.
Unfortunately this did not effect the conversion of Lucia’s family.
They had been more unsympathetic than ever since the apparition
of July 13. Previously her father had shrugged off the whole affair
with some muttering about “women’s tales.” But he had passed
2 He is still doing this at the age of eighty-six. I met him by happy chance on a.
train between Lisboa and Santarem last summer. He told me he had given Lucia
her first communion.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEkKat-RQ1PKS2HUZTiny3kN3UPgajZ6uoziP3pbIwq8kSW2TtRgJS14QUu5V1YQ59gnepkK5FCUKClhKtC2LHjTklo6Kaaf68Eb2s9LomcSW8J5MjLiyV-M6-eAkvbH9-6sVRf=w491-h810-v0
88 Our Lady of Fatima
from neutrality to open hostility on the day when he went to
inspect his vegetable gardens at Cova da Ina, and saw what the
crowds had done to them. Thousands of feet had packed the soil
so hard that there was no sense cultivating it any more; horses
had eaten or trampled his cabbages, beans and potato vines; all
his labor had been wasted. Antonio grumbled and fumed, and
drank more copinhos than ever.
The rest of the family also had a new weapon to brandish over
the head of poor Lucia. She and her visions had brought them all
to the verge of starvation. When she was hungry, her sisters would
say, “Go and eat what you find growing at Cova da Ina!” Or
Maria Rosa would cry, “Yes, ask that Lady to give you something
to eat! You made all the people go to Cova da Iria. Get your food
there.”
“We didn’t make them go,” said loyal Jacinta from the door¬
way. “They went there themselves!”
But Maria Rosa felt too strongly to listen to reasoning. There
were days when Lucia feared to ask her for so much as a piece
of bread, and went to bed hungry.
From time to time her mother would take her to the Prior for
another interrogation, hoping each time that he would find a
way to break her stubborn will. At the end the good man always
shook his head and said, “I don’t know what to say about all
this.” No wonder Maria Rosa still doubted, when a man, so learned,
confessed that he could make nothing of it.
It was only at Cabego or Valinhos or on the hills near Cova da
Iria that Lucia could find any peace or solace at all. And even
there the discussions of the three had taken on a sombre and more
thoughtful tone since the breath-taking revelations of July 13.
The fires of hell, the damnation of many souls, a second world
war with millions of people starving, homeless, tormented, butch¬
ered, tumbling unprepared into eternity—how could the world
ever look the same to childish eyes after Divine Wisdom had
disclosed to them such horrors! The two girls could think of
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFDhLiGR7XjgMYa8jddj706wTHyI1_l1fOVWzYq-H-Za83SGbP9fyfyQPa32Zysks_x9YOjtiRNnsHa3KdnLEm6Au1Mwc337GQbPoYOxpMTBMRagJMHRsj_LGJ6kNTEu1gjdFwoHg=w491-h810-v0
nothing else. Francisco, for some reason, was much less shaken
by the experience. Instead of brooding on the countless souls he
had seen rising and falling like sparks in the flames under the
taunts of fallen angels, he would fix his thoughts upon God, upon
His goodness and His glory.
“How wonderful God is!” he would cry ecstatically. “There is
no way to say it. All you can say is, that nobody can say it! But
isn’t it too bad that He is so sad! If I could only console Him!”
Jacinta did not find it so easy to put out of mind the horror of
eternal death. If a world war could be both incredible and painfully
real, so much the more so was hell. But what does a child of
seven know of the enormity of sin? She was shocked, profoundly
puzzled. A few days after the apparition of July she sat for a long
time on a stone, reflecting deeply while the sheep munched the
withered' grass and furze. Finally she said:
“That Lady said that many souls go to hell. What is hell?”
“It is a pit full of worms and a very big bonfire,” replied Lucia,
perhaps quoting her mother, “and people go there who commit
sins and don’t confess them, and they stay forever and burn.”
“And never get out any more?”
“No.”
“Not after many, many years?”
“No. Hell never ends. And heaven doesn’t either. Whoever
goes to heaven never gets out of it, and whoever goes to hell
doesn’t either. Don’t you see that they are eternal, because they
never end?”
Jacinta found this concept of endlessness at once baffling and
tantalizing. She could never put it wholly out of mind. Often in
the midst of some game she would stop suddenly and say:
“But look here, doesn’t hell end even after many, many, many
years r
“No.”
“And those people who have to burn there never die? Never?
And they never turn into ashes? And if people pray a great deal
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFWXIoUWE4t0GuIo_tb8h9LE1FqmyyXy5etPjRBQJT772xxq3W9UScc50T3ovwss9uLFso0Bso8tlWy8Ng8MsNTDBi6FKA5iRwnVF6vJnX0yAqMJWWvmfomNp7HzoGmsmvog11lJw=w491-h810-v0
9°
for sinners, Our Lord will save them from that? And with sacri¬
fices too? Poor we have to pray and make many sacrifices for
them!”
Then, when the thought of the burden of sin became almost
unbearable, she would remember the consolation that had been
granted with it.
“How good that Lady is! Yes, she has promised to take us to
heaven!”
Jacinta was too unselfish to be able to dwell long or complacently
on her own good fortune when there were so many others who
would never share it. To her the sight of gehennah was like a
gate opening upon a steep road of asceticism. “I think I would lay
down a thousand lives to save one soul of the man I saw being
lost,” wrote Saint Teresa of Jesus after a similar experience; and
the little serrana of Aljustrel was so stricken with the same noble
pity that she acquired a thirst for penance to which Lucia could
apply only the word “insatiable.” Other Christians accepted hell
on faith, because Christ had said repeatedly and with solemn
emphasis that there is a hell, but Jacinta had seen it; and once
she grasped the idea that God’s justice is the counterpart of His
mercy, and that there must be a hell if there is to be a heaven,
nothing seemed important to her except to save as many souls
as possible from the horrors she had glimpsed under the radiant
hands of the Queen of Heaven. Nothing could be too hard, nothing
too small or too great to give up.
“Eat, Jacinta.”
“No, I will offer this sacrifice for poor sinners who eat too much.”
“Drink, Jacinta.”
“No, this is for those who drink too much.”
She would say suddenly to Lucia, “I am sorry for you. Fran¬
cisco and I are going to heaven, but you stay here alone. I will
ask Our Lady to take you to heaven! But she wants you to stay
here for a while! When you see the war, don’t be afraid—in
heaven I will be praying for you.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGpKTUTFe4bM-KpPc0fghDw0BUYluQKesgySuC9rFgx3XLMX-Aa02FDxMxayzKVzzINwOxPkADxqL2DO1_coLVdiw9uxn7jE42Ro137R-ODGvi9byT-kYng2QtNYjA5VS-eBxJh=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 91
More and more, however, she brooded on the lost souls.
“Jacinta, what are you thinking of?” asked Lucia one day.
“Of that war that is going to come, and of so many people
who are going to die and go to hell. What a pity there must be
a war and they must go to hell because they won’t stop sinning!”
Time and again this thought recurred with sickening impact.
She would say, with a look of terror, “Hell! Hell! How sorry I
am for the souls that are going to hell!” Then she would fall
on her knees, clasp her hands and repeat over and over the
prayer Our Lady had taught them to add to each decade of the
Rosary:
“O my Jesus, pardon us, save us from the fire of hell, draw
all souls to heaven, especially those in most need!”
One day after she had been thus long upon her knees, she
called:
“Francisco! Francisco, are you going to pray with me? It is
necessary to pray a great deal to save souls from hell. So many
are going there! So many!” And they said the prayer again
together, for those who said no prayers.
“Why doesn’t Our Lady show hell to sinners?” demanded
Jacinta one day. “If they saw it, they would never sin again,
so they wouldn’t go there. You must tell that Lady to show hell
to all those people. You will see how they will be converted!”
Poor Jacinta! It seemed so simple. Perhaps she had not yet heard
the parable of Dives and Lazarus. “If they will not listen to
Moses and the prophets, neither would they believe were one
to rise from the dead.” 3 She was silent for a moment. Then
she said:
“Why didn’t you tell that Lady that she ought to show hell
to those people?”
“I forgot.”
“So did I,” said the younger child sadly.
3 St. Luke XVI, 31.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFoAjyouqG5iZwR5X2_NnRMiMjYxOmcz7UizmuPeEuzy0ObPzRHE8bjxW29286bkYAomjsYXlxuhhuGn_doBn4cyNjLEtd2QDN2NaSHRwsYx_AFl-YzcmzvWmpPPLvHY3V0rzkajg=w491-h810-v0
92 Our Lady of Fatima
“What sins are they that those people do,” she asked one day,
“to have to go to hell?”
“I don’t know.” Lucia, after all, was not much older than her
cousin. “Perhaps the sin of not going to Mass on Sunday, of
stealing, of saying wicked words, cursing people, swearing.” 4
“And only for one word they can go to hell?”
“Well, it’s a sin! Let them keep quiet and go to Mass.”
“Oh, if I could only show them hell!” She reflected a few
moments, then said, “If Our Lady lets you, tell all the people
what hell is, so that they will commit no more sins and not go
there.”
Another time she said, in horror, as if she still saw the vision
before her, “So many people falling into hell! So many people
in hell!”
“Don’t be afraid!” Lucia tried to reassure her. “You are going
to heaven.”
“Yes, yes, I’m going. But I want all those people to go there I ’>
too!
Jacinta’s round cheeks were beginning to look drawn and hollow,
her black eyes to glow like those that peer into other worlds than
ours. And like many other friends of God, she had already begun,
in August, to have prophetic visions. Some of the most gruesome
scenes of the Second World War passed through the mind of this
child of seven almost a quarter of a century before they were
enacted upon the roads of France or Holland, or in the ruins of
London or of Frankfort.
One hot day when they had been sitting on the rocks at Cabego,
lazily watching the listless sheep below, she suddenly prostrated
herself and uttered the prayer the angel had taught them:
“My God, I believe, I adore, I hope, and I love you! I beg
pardon of You for those who do not believe, do not adore, do
not hope, and do not love You!”
4 Lucia’s impression is that most souls are lost through “sins of the flesh.” She
believes that Our Lady revealed this to Jacinta in 1920.—III, p. 5.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHPr0PJ_T594T7jdvS-oqqeBuaDp20jyNIj-SNCxfRJsy1VlW0hpcDDNfroGp8PcZjdpIAMlPLRdPHWxNppzn1TwLHgWfgVzP2cvQfaAJtUeP4tI6ausH19HFbq7LWW7UAAvFq6=w491-h810-v0
A profound silence followed. Then the little girl said to Lucia:
“Don’t you see such a long street, so many roads and fields full
of people weeping with hunger, and they have nothing to eat?
And the Holy Father in a church before the Immaculate Heart
of Mary, praying? And so many people praying with him?”
Possibly this referred to the consecration of the world to the
Immaculate Heart by Pope Pius XIP'in 1542. But there was much
more about the Pope, or a Pope, in the visions of Jacinta, and she
was so disturbed that she wanted to tell everybody, so that all
good Christians would pray unceasingly for him.
“Can I say that I saw the Holy Father and all those people?”
she asked.
“No,” answered Lucia.