 you are not going.
Then we can escape these days to the cave of Cabego, and nobody
will meet us.”
On the day of the party they were all at Cova da Iria, saying
the Rosary.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHPd5LjHj1cL0V-ckxW9T7QHsCiqGla8mv6m9u2hJTbEwf1LNFsb4TpZxo3okpeoRc3OZTaTLJHCZI0fk2wABQ6xMIIkFcqzSrViLvctfo3Hw0lElYbNcCqz9GYNF1vZoD8_qkRWQ=w491-h810-v0
Lucia’s godfather, Anastacio, one of the few in Aljustrel who
did not have to work for a living, had a rather worldly wife named
Teresa. One Sunday afternoon she saw the children passing, and
cried, “Come here, my little impostors, come here! I haven’t seen
you in a long time!” She gave them some sweets, and then asked
them to sing a certain popular song, a rather lusty pagan one,
commencing:
“Greetings to the girl
With the new sun’s fragrance! . .
When they had finished, all the company laughed and wanted it
repeated. But Francisco said, “Let’s not sing this any more. Our
Lord certainly doesn’t like us to sing such things.” So they declined
and took their leave. Lucia believed that in disappointing her
godfather’s wife she probably lost a good inheritance; “but the
good God had destined me for another heritage much more
precious.”
It was October, 1918, and the war was about to end, as Our
Lady had promised. But the great epidemic of influenza, one of the
concomitant scourges of the almost universal punishment of man’s
apostacy, was laying low millions of persons throughout the world;
and toward the end of October it made its first appearance in
Aljustrel. All of the Abobora family except Lucia were stricken.
In Ti Marto’s house, he alone was left to nurse the rest. Francisco,
the first to be put to bed, had a severe case, ending with
bronchial pneumonia.
It was heartbreaking for his father and mother to see him welcome
the illness as the beginning of the journey that the Lady had
promised him. He became so weak that he could hardly move, yet
he never complained. “If we gave him a little milk,” Olimpia
remembers, “he took the milk. If we gave him an egg, he ate the
egg. Poor little lad! He took the bitter medicines without making
a face. This gave us hope that he would get well. But what do you
think? He was always telling us that it was no use, that Our Lady
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFPyAD0UZuIPScH-hdHaWj0EsebNoqa8AelEcU60XBnHFEY1BKfr0BOCSW7LIzOX6ZpTr_EEP8Wda8q4dQrk-zQ5Qz8z8h-AnxT7k5vlAY2fRZbyO-RPkGdUSMLa0njYZJWHbxm=w491-h810-v0
was coming to take him to heaven.” His only sorrow was that
he was no longer able to make his daily visit to the hidden Jesus in
the church at Fatima.
Jacinta became ill a few days after Francisco. One day Lucia
found her strangely elated. ‘‘Look, Lucia!” she said. “Our Lady
came to see us here, and she said that she is coming very soon to
take Francisco to heaven. And she asked me if I still wanted to
convert more sinners and I said yes.
“Our Lady wants me to go to two hospitals. But not to be cured.
It is to suffer more for the love of God, for the conversion of
sinners and in reparation for the offenses committed against the
Immaculate Heart of Mary.
“She said that you were not going,” she continued, as Lucia,
perhaps, began to look hopeful. “She said my mother is going to
take me, and then I will stay there alone.”
Ti Marto and his wife heard this sort of talk with a chill of
fear. For this was no ordinary sickness, this bronchial influenza.
Every day one heard of some neighbor who had died; every day the
church bell at Fatima announced another sad rendezvous in the
cemetery across the way. In many Portuguese towns that winter
the tolling of funeral bells had to be forbidden, to prevent a state
of panic. But Ti Marto had lived through too many troubles to
allow himself to get hysterical whenever a hearse went by. He had
never doubted that Jacinta had seen Our Lady at Cova da Ina, but
he was not the man to call in the undertaker just because a little
girl had a dream or a vision.
Sure enough, the fever of Francisco began to go down day by
day, his pulse to grow stronger. Toward Christmas he was able to
get up, though pale and weak, and go about a little. At the
beginning of the new year he seemed almost himself again. In
January he went to the cave at Cabego to say the Angel’s prayer.
One day he would pray at Cova da Ina, another at Valinhos. Once,
although his head ached, he walked to Fatima to kneel for quite a
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF_gRWTjMCZfSYg7AOUhFE3-AaDGJIIoWplmaqK2gQvjRZCIWUqO5x4rq6zi2MsstwGUS_xyDhyLDro-KEjRe4hjKmx1oF72k011lvIeq2RaJGyXrXT9dtgj2Ikmf8k2UNS5HER=w491-h810-v0
while before the altar, consoling the hidden Jesus for the world’s
neglect.
When pilgrims came he tried to answer their questions patiently.
This was not always easy. One afternoon he returned rather tired
from Vahnhos to find the house full of people who had spread
rosaries, crucifixes, medals and other objects on a table, and were
waiting for him to bless them. “I can’t bless them, and neither
can you,” he said with some severity. “The priests bless them.”
The visitors departed in haste, shouting insults at him over their
shoulders.
Before the end of January he was ill again, with a low fever.
Ti Marto as usual tried to put a good face on the matter. “Never
mind, Francisco, you are going to get well, just as you did before.
You are going to be a strong man, you will see.”
“No,” replied the boy. “Our Lady is coming very soon now.”
His godmother Teresa was one of those who attempted to make
him take what she considered a more hopeful view. She promised
him a speedy recovery, for she was going to offer his weight in
wheat to give the poor, and Our Lady would never refuse to grant
such a request.
“It’s not worth your trouble,” said the boy calmly. “Our
Lady will not grant you this grace.”
A few days after this he became much worse, and had to return
to his bed. It was that single iron bed still to be seen there, with its
patchwork quilt, its ornate colored metal back, and its two brass
knobs. It filled up the space between three plain walls. Overhead,
toward the right, there was a small window, showing nothing but
a bit of sky. As Francisco laid his hot and aching head on the
pillow, he was convinced that he would never get up again. And
from that time on he became steadily worse.
Jacinta was ill most of this time in another room. She would
listen until she felt sure that both her parents were out of the
house. Then she would slip out of bed and steal into Francisco’s
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGYoJrlnJWJfES-Lu7D9xvc4KLNukRhtBi_hUL5SZ_KwDQsfByc2b0_NeMtYJfFjrDasdPHQrLENlXCATFYvdWp75yKRalslrG3LAgzzjKQW_qfxy8sqBquwO-p5z5y8leCRj6e=w491-h810-v0
[i68 Our Lady of Fatima
room to perch beside him and talk, until this was discovered and
forbidden. Toward evening Lucia would stop in on her way home
from school. Ti Olimpia would smile broadly. She knew what this
meant to the invalids.
Lucia would say, “Well, Jacinta, have you made many sacrifices
today?’’
“Yqs, a lot,” answered the little girl. She lowered her voice.
“My mother was out and I wanted to go many times to visit
Francisco, and I didn’t do it.”
Lucia went to the boy’s room. He was flushed, his eyes much too
large and bright. O D
“Do you suffer much, Francisco?”
“Bastante. But it doesn’t matter. I suffer to console Our Lord, and
in a little while I shall be with Him.”
“When you do go, don’t forget to ask Our Lady to take me there
soon, also.”
“I won’t ask that. You know very well that she doesn’t want
you there yet.”
One afternoon Lucia brought some other girls, schoolmates.
When they had gone, Francisco looked seriously at her and said:
“Don’t walk with them, because you can learn to commit sins.”
“But they leave school when I do.”
“When you leave, spend a little while at the feet of the hidden
Jesus, and then come home alone.” 8
His fever was somewhat higher, and it was plain that he was
growing weaker. One day when Lucia was alone with him, he
took a piece of rope from under the bedclothes and handed it to
her.
“Take it before my mother finds it. I’m not strong enough to hide
it any more.” It was the one they had found on the road and had
made into a sort of hair-shirt.
By the first of April Francisco was so weak that he could hardly
s Memoir IV, p. 20.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEQ79WHXQHHFX8NoZhPUTCd_tFFlzSC6Pm5Qc0sAWCgCak9ONodj2Vg2V3MinX-o7FU2NC9DjhaSqqnL04SbdgjOH8ojr2lQy0hT_74GAZasdZfIXNHqwtPdDVnJKtchRxABLddDg=w491-h810-v0
move his lips in prayer. It grieved him not to be able to say his
Rosary. “I’m not strong enough, Mother,” he said. “When I say
the Hail Marys my head gets all mixed up.”
“Just say it in your heart then.” Olimpia laid an anxious hand
on his brow. “Our Lady hears it just the same and is just as pleased.”
He smiled at her contentedly.
It was spring again, and sometimes the distant sad song of a
nightingale would come floating in through the tiny window on the
sweet air of the Serra. Francisco said he wanted to see Lucia. She
came running over.
“Look, Lucia, I am very sick, and I am going to heaven very
soon.”
Lucia tried to seem casual. “Then look here, don’t forget to pray
much for sinners, for the Holy Father, for me and for Jacinta.”
“Yes,.I will. But look—ask Jacinta these things afterwards. I’m
afraid I’ll forget them when I go to Our Lord. And first I want to
console Him. . . . Look, Lucia I want to go to confession.”
On the night of April 2 he was so much worse that his parents
promised to send to the rectory the first thing in the morning to ask
the Prior to come and hear his confession and give him Viaticum.
In the early dawn Francisco whispered to his sister Teresa that
he wanted to see Lucia at once. The girl ran down to the Abobora
house, woke her cousin, and said:
“Lucia, come quickly! Francisco is very sick and says he wants
to tell you something!”
Lucia dressed hastily and hurried to his bedside. She asked his
mother, his brother John and two of his sisters to leave the room,
since it was some secret that Francisco wanted to tell her. They did
so, and the boy said:
“It is that I am going to confess so that I can receive Commum
ion and then die. I want you to tell me if you have seen me commit
any sin and ask Jacinta if she has seen me commit any.”
Lucia thought hard. “Sometimes you disobeyed your mother—
when she told you to stop staying in the house, and you hid.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHDMrxS3pIe9qbcxS2sq9lrfzNTRBVP1oT_Z7ATTDOe8-eDQTw4yXPjixI-AWZGtDbWgE79chgB55h7Ntdzb7VT9laVVtjijrnwR8cP-wyCA-B1wizIq5X2r3wh40FI9FXUy_nCUw=w491-h810-v0
“It is true. I did that. Now go ask Jacinta if she remembers
anything else.”
Jacinta thought very hard. “Look, tell him that before Our Lady
appeared to us, he stole a tostao 4 from his father to buy the hand-
organ from Jose Marto of Casa Velha, and that when the boys of
Aljustrel threw stones at those of Boleiros he also threw some.”
Lucia hurried back with this message to Francisco. “I’ve already
confessed those,” he murmured. “But I’ll tell them again. Perhaps
it is for these sins that I did that Our Lord is so sad. But even if I
don’t die I will never do them again. I am sorry now.” And
putting his hands together he said, “O my Jesus, pardon us, save us
from the fire of hell, draw all souls to heaven, especially those in
most need!” Then turning to Lucia he added, “Look, you too ask
Our Lord to pardon me my sins.”
“I will, don’t worry. If Our Lord hadn’t forgiven you, Our Lady
wouldn’t have told Jacinta the other day that she was coming soon
to take you to heaven. Now I am going to Mass, and there I will
pray to the hidden Jesus for you.”
“Look—ask Him also that the Senhor Prior may give me Holy
Communion.”
“Why, yes!”
When Lucia returned from Mass, Jacinta had got up and was
sitting on the edge of her brother’s bed. Francisco said at once:
“Did you ask the hidden Jesus to have the Senhor Prior give me
Holy Communion?”
“I did.”
“Afterwards in heaven I will pray for you.”
“Do! Yet the other day you said you would not! ”
“That was to take you to heaven soon. But if you wish I will
pray, and then Our Lady will do as you wish.”
“I do wish. You pray.”
This is what Lucia remembers of the conversation. “I left him
* A small coin worth 100 rets-—about nine cents in U. S. money.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH4Oevfv2bJARLJVWqz8NwZgYQj76rtkRqHZXxv0Vs8g5GRIEghYI_2ENzJ_cTmqcBpRd59WYTv1m4sX6OjsgViZ9Y3ur10YDgm_cMG98MoVwrXRhip_DS_J1ofUADnevz7sSIrIw=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 171
then and went about my daily duties of work and school. When I
returned at nightfall, he was radiant with joy. He had confessed
and the Senhor Prior had promised him to bring Holy Communion
the following day.”
The next morning, April 3, was a lovely one. Francisco lay very
tranquil, waiting for the priest. After a while his eyes opened. He
had heard the tinkling of the little bell that the acolyte was ringing
to let people know that the Senhor Prior had the Sacred Host with
him. He tried to sit up, but he was too weak, and his godmother
Teresa told him he could receive his First Communion just as well
lying down. Meanwhile Olimpia had lighted the holy candles
and had set them on a small table by the bed.
Now the priest was in the room holding the hidden Jesus before
him', and saying three times, “Domine, non sum dignus. . . .”
Franciscp was almost in heaven.
When Jacinta went afterwards to see him—she was allowed to
that day—he told her all about it. “Today I am happier than you,
for I have within my breast the hidden Jesus. I am going to heaven,
but there I will pray a great deal to Our Lord and Our Lady that
they bring you there too, soon.”
Jacinta stayed with him nearly all day, sometimes saying the
Rosary for him when he was unable to say it himself, sometimes
just sitting on the edge of the bed and looking at him. Lucia came
after school as usual. Francisco said to her:
“Certainly in heaven I am going to pray hard for your wishes—
who knows but Our Lady may take you also very soon?”
Lucia had changed her mind. “Don’t do that, no. Just imagine
yourself at the feet of Our Lord and Our Lady who are so
good.”
“All right.” Then a terrible thought came to him. “But perhaps
she won’t remember me!”
“Perhaps she won’t remember you! ! ! Patience!”
Francisco smiled.
He looked so ethereal that Lucia doubted whether she would see
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFZh4ghewF5Mb2g4535XrKDikdEZDeKAhznpbDRFXMRN800VqqKJZZZmEKgiuijSBcno6h9otEB4bPCDi_pUAzESqBajG8Dxrx8iTsBL4kwHu7KRmxW36jr5YcgQfFdSzYLUtcj=w491-h810-v0
172 Our Lady of Fatima
him again. “Goodby, Francisco,” she said softly. “If you go to
heaven tonight, don’t forget me there, do you hear?”
“I won’t forget you, no. Don’t worry.”
He seized her right hand with unexpected strength and pressed it
hard for a long moment, looking deeply into her eyes; and both
were blinded by tears. “Do you want anything else?” It sounded
stupid, but it was all she could think of.
“No,” he replied in a low voice.
Ti Olimpia came in to send Lucia home. “Then goodby,
Francisco, till heaven. Goodby till heaven.” Lucia was still weeping
as she went out. She could stand no more.
All night the boy lay quietly thinking of the hidden Jesus he
had received and would soon see face to face. He was thirsty, but
was unable to drink the milk his mother offered; he could take only
a few drops of water. “I’m all right,” he would say, “don’t give me
anything.”
Once he called her and said, “Look, mother, what a pretty light
there, near the door! . . .
“Now I don’t see it any more.”
In the morning he asked her blessing and pardon for any trouble
he had caused her in his life. At ten o’clock his life passed almost
imperceptibly. There was still a faint smile on his lips when
Jacmta and Lucia came to look at him.
The next day, April 5, 1919, some men in green capes, members
of the Misencordia, went slowly up the cobbled road to Fatima
with an acolyte carrying a crucifix. Four boys in white walked
after them with a small coffin. Ti Marto and Olimpia followed,
and a few others. They laid the remains of Francisco in a small
grave near the cemetery gate. All said the Rosary.
Jacinta was too ill to be there. Lucia went up afterwards alone
and placed a little cross on the grave.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGwUtkN94WIwk3UeQkphIBFMLxDinVFhvjRYkZvzw7AM7fAAlFmYPZaPZvKF5B52NnnWaNZHy3wg8tr7a3e0xYcaRdxptyuxMbhEFGk2u9XtOUHNAZ-cEq82gd_uD4gVlQNuTuZkw=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER XVI
Jacinta was moved into the bed where Francisco had died. It was
nearer the front door, and she could see and hear people better.
Perhaps Olimpia thought this would help her get over her grief.
For although Jacinta knew where Francisco was and who had taken
him, she missed him terribly.
The person who helped her most in those gloomy spring days was
Lucia. Every day she would stop in, cheerful and matter-of-fact, on
her way home from school. On holidays or Sundays she would
bring flowers from the Serra, and as she arranged them on the table,
would tell Jacinta where she had found them. “These arc from Cova
da Iria. I found this at Vahnhos. This grew by the Lagoa.” The
best were from the slope of Cabe^o—violets, wild roses, peonies
and daisies in turn, all the flowers that the little girl would have
picked if she had been well.
Lucia brought diverting accounts of the chapel that some of
the devout were building near the azinheira at Cova da Iria.
Everybody wanted to give orders, and no one wanted to take
them; hence there were some warm and amusing arguments,
in which