 the shrine to collect rain for pilgrims, and was deeply impressed
when a spring of pure clear water bubbled up from the dry rocky
soil, increasing in volume until it filled thirty-six taps and became
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGv7DEWcMXQUEwbOHkyAO2pnSJxnya7vR55b_UNmvdhpFICq05YpKXkfu6ZO0Bpq_1bFc_pXjU7_u_TZ9JuVnCrYJ-mZcgzJjq_WVXbjaXB5msJriEHz5W5mRYXssUQO1zec1SBjA=w491-h810-v0
the main supply of the peasants roundabout, and a source of health
to many sick persons who drank of it.
Opening the formal canonical investigation the following year,
the Bishop wrote: “Of the three children who said they were
favored by the apparition, two were dead before our arrival in this
diocese. We have questioned the only survivor several times. Her
account and her responses are simple and sincere and we have
discovered in them nothing against faith or morals.” Expressing
doubt that any qualities or powers of an almost untaught girl of
fourteen could have drawn such crowds to the scene (especially
after her departure) , or that any natural charms of that remote and
barren place could have attracted them, he appointed a committee
of investigation, and called upon his people to furnish any
information they might have, whether favorable or unfavorable.
The number of pilgrims steadily increased. Cardinal Mendes
Belo, who had laughed at the affair in 1918, changed his opinion
before his death in 1922, and regretted that he could not go to
Fatima. The unrelenting opposition of the Government and of the
Liberals of Santarem and Ourem served only to whip the fervor of
the devout to a steadier flame. On March 6, 1922, for example,
the little chapel was destroyed by four bombs, though the altar
and shrine were saved when a fifth failed to explode; but on the
following May 13 some 60,000 believers assembled, despite the
mobilization of the Republican Guard by the Governor of Santarem,
and made humble reparation to Our Lady for the outrage. In 1927
the Bishop presided over a pilgrimage for the (irst time. The
following year he welcomed 300,000 persons in one day. In 1930 he
officially recognized and accepted the devotion, declaring the visions
of the three children worthy of faith, and asking the people to show
their gratitude to the Mother of God by the purity and sincerity of
their lives. In 1931 he was joined by all the other Portuguese
bishops, including the new Patriarch, Dom Manuel Gonsalves
Cardinal Cerejeira, in honoring her.
Several hundreds of miraculous cures meanwhile had been
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEVYCkiYm4kghenY9HZZ8pExDzncTPlM2UEYqn4TDxoL2mej5Zcp2fctvCeZt1owhJz5xSg5VVbwPQarNtSG4l1EvtgcNO5v-3dpK0Sqwt9gKTxuBUZpsABzN9Qo6hWZkMdw5lUOg=w491-h810-v0
registered: cures of tuberculosis, Pott’s disease, blindness, deafness,
spinal meningitis, cancer, paralysis and many other afflictions of
which Father Fonseca, for example, gives ample accounts, with
names, dates, and details, in his well-documented book. Only last
June (1946) there was a great sensation over the instant healing of
Miss Maria Jose da Silva of Tomar, of tuberculosis. The following
September 13, when a lame youth threw away his crutches during
a procession, and walked upright for the first time in many years,
he was congratulated by a great throng of men and women, many
of whom were weeping with joy, among them the ex-Queen of
Italy and her daughter. Of the moral cures—the conversions, the
broken homes restored, the return of hardened sinners to the practice
of the Faith—there have been thousands.
To Our Lady of Fatima the Portuguese attribute many of the
blessings, both spiritual and material, that have come to their coun¬
try in recent years. The Republic which so long persecuted the
Church and the Fatima pilgrims vanished in the anarchy of 1926.
Three generals, amid popular acclaim, took over the government,
and by various steps set up the dictatorship of Salazar which has
since ruled the nation. It is not within the scope of this work to
appraise any existing political regime. Whatever else may be said
for or against the present government at Lisboa, it has at least
maintained peace and order; hence the Church, purified by persecu¬
tion, has found time for recuperation and restoration, for training
new priests, building seminaries, bringing lapsed Catholics back
to the fold. Tremendous progress has been made in many ways
under a new and vigorous hierarchy.
Yet there is much evidence to support the fears of Sister Maria
das Dores that her people have not done nearly enough by way of
reparation for the blasphemies and indifference of former times.
After all the marvels of Fatima, only 4,000,000 out of almost
8,000,000 Portuguese pretend to be Catholics in any sense of the
word. There are hardly more than 3,000 priests—about one for each
1,300 professing Christians. The pdroco of Vimiero, birthplace of
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEKMK6T8A3tabSeHxhRvb16jKNuurU-NMvlC6MUXh6kF--X8-HhJCqUFSfMkRl2aC7q6cn0eSj20h94Z4-BrZtbScKzqjOCiL6qh0jfPRABCszwzH7aj80Mvywc9eS5sTlxZ0dWqw=w491-h810-v0
Mr. Salazar, told me that he usually had but 150 out of a population
of 1200 at his Sunday Mass. In the large cities there is bitter
anti-clericalism, and much Communistic activity. Churches are
still closed at sundown for fear of desecration; nuns do not dare
appear on the streets in their habits; and the Salazar government
still retains some of the church property confiscated by the Republic.
Mr. Salazar limits his practice of the Catholic faith to a barely
discernible minimum; and as one of his officials said to me, “It is
a mistake to call our regime Catholic. So far as the Church is
concerned we are neutral.” This neutrality has helped in one way.
However, when the clergy tried to extend Catholic Action to aid
the underpaid and underfed workers, they were told in no uncertain
terms to confine their labors to “spiritual” affairs. They are not
allowed to apply the social principles of the great encyclicals of
Popes Leo XIII and Pius XI. They are not permitted to make any
effective appeal to the anti-clerical masses in the cities. The
Voz da Fatima stands almost alone against a financial empire
ruled from London when it warns the rich that in paying starva¬
tion wages they court the very red ruin they fear.
Nevertheless the priests and people are grateful for such freedom
as they have received, and hope that the rest will follow in time.
They are especially thankful that their country escaped the
harrowing experiences of Spain in 1936. Anticipating the reign of
terror that began there in July, 1936, and fearing its spread through¬
out the peninsula, all the Portuguese bishops made a solemn vow at
Cova da Ina as early as May of that year, that if Our Lady
protected their land from war and red revolution they would return
to make a public thanksgiving. This promise they kept at the
great national pilgrimage of May 13, 1938, amid scenes of incredible
rejoicing.
There were similar manifestations in the subsequent years, when
many had become convinced that Our Lady of Fatima had saved
Portugal from World War II, as she had told the children she
would. When the twenty-fifth anniversary of the apparitions was
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFd3jHAN1YwYlOWTgjGEVMlMWYGiNxsXN6-VhYTv0nMQz_Nz0C2stlq3wNtUbWJr-GN6knOTjZkFavKBaW07zMSkZ3yckba27yv8goXCzDOBGyC66dxRMZZ4hvy4qtwszO3wWBFGg=w491-h810-v0
21 I Our Lady of Fatima
celebrated on May 13, 1942, a telegram came from Pope Pius XII
with his blessing to all the pilgrims, and to Portugal. Before the
end of that year he consecrated the entire world to the Immaculate
Heart of Mary in the presence of 40,000 persons at Saint Peter’s in
Rome. Thus the Fatima devotion overflowed the boundaries of the
terra de Santa Maria and became worldwide.
To Sister Dores it seemed the fulfilment of the prophecy of
Jacinta a quarter of a century before: “The Holy Father in a church
before the Immaculate Heart of Mary, praying, and so many people
praying with him.” It was a step also toward the final accom¬
plishment of the wishes of Our Lady, even if the Holy Father did
not mention Russia specifically. In his prayer he referred to “the
peoples separated from us by error and by schism, especially the
one which professes a singular devotion for you, the one in which
there is not a single house which did not display your venerated
ikon, today perhaps hidden and put away for better days.” The
public consecration of Russia was yet to be made.
Sister Dores meanwhile remains not only the sole surviving
witness of the apparitions, but the only person in the world who
knows the Last Secret, of which nothing has been divulged except
that it means woe to some and joy to others. I heard in Portugal
from a man of the highest credibility that when she was ill and
in danger of death in 1939, she obtained permission from Our Lady,
at the Bishop’s instance, to write it out and seal it up in an envelope
marked, “Not to be opened until i960.”
If this cannot be verified at present, there is no such mystery
about the four memoirs she composed at the command of Dom Jose
to make sure that her version of the events of 1917 would not be
lost. These accounts, written on ordinary lined notebook paper in
a precise, clear, regular, rather commonplace handwriting, suggest
a sane and well-balanced personality. It is interesting to compare
them with the manuscripts of Saint Teresa of Jesus in the
Escorial. Both were written rapidly, with the intention of imparting
truth rather than achieving literary effect. Neither has the smudges
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFJIk1R788ekQrO5GVegyY0ERLzQad_rmu3CT578YF2v5SCF4aweh6VPPnMCaanW7Tyjorn8UX5-vNYoLG6vImj0w2fQmYYHWWEF8yF6_mYkS-vfXweefnr8-Yoptpv9Ho4g6hP=w491-h810-v0
and other irregularities that betray neurotic or psychotic tendencies.
And if Sister Dores lacks the individuality, the grand manner, the
veritable genius of the Spanish mystic, at least she is not so
disdainful of grammar and punctuation!
The first account, written in 1936, contains many of the incidents
I have related, besides a touching little poem in memory of “dear
Jacinta,” somewhat after the pattern of Santa Teresa’s lyrics;,
O tu que a terra
Passaste voando
Jacinta querida
Numa dor intensa
Jesus amando
Nao esque^as a prece
Que eu te pedia
Se minha amiga
Junto do trono
Da Virgem Maria.
Lino de candura
Perola bnlhante
Oh! la no Ceu
Ondes vives tnunfante
Serafim d’amor,
Com teu irmaosinho
Roga por mim
Aos pes do Senhor.
This memoir concludes with a request that if the Bishop publishes
what she has written, he will say nothing of her “poor miserable
self,” and assures him that if he burns it without reading it she
will be happy, having composed it only out of obedience.
It was in the second memoir, of 1937, that Sister Dores first
let fall a casual reference to the Angel of Peace. This was some-
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEzfsabMYHyVN5evmumMfgAZ9Tn00gvaDJMt1e95S1qn54rDHoVke5PWbn9pUSazmMsM2e_jed652jGzOFk0Ekgdjl2OsxocQXC8hk1HvCZ3SjNimINshCbFhopq-xjGwR7scksYA=w491-h810-v0
2I3 Our Lady of Fatima
thing like a bombshell after twenty-one years of silence, and in
some quarters it provoked consternation and even indignation.
How could this be explained? What would people think? One
learned visitor went so far as to say:
“You will have to do many turns in Purgatory, Sister, for con¬
cealing such a thing all this time!”
“I haven’t the least fear of Purgatory on that account,” she
replied calmly. “I have always acted under obedience, and there
is no penalty or punishment for obedience.” 1
As a matter of fact the Angel story, confusing as it has been
to some persons, supports her credibility. A pseudo-mystic or
impostor clever enough to invent so remarkable a tale would never
have drawn suspicion upon herself by a startling and uncalled-for
addition many years later. And a psychopath suffering from
delusions would have had other hallucinations, surely, in all that
time. Yet her superiors and associates agree that she is a perfectly
normal religious, who has never shown any inclination to parade
her spiritual experiences.
The third memoir, written August 8, 1941, contains further
details about Jacinta, and an account of the weird light of January
25, 1938.
When the Bishop demanded a fourth and definitive account,
Sister Dores retired to the garret of the convent at Tuy on the
morning of December 8, 1941, and after praying a long while
for the grace to set everything down corrdctly and in order, sat
on a trunk near a small window, and holding a pad of notepaper
on her lap, began her fourth and longest manuscript, in which
she recorded, for posterity, the exact words of the Angel and of
the Lady of the Rosary, with all the circumstances she could
remember of each apparition in succession. The beginning, in
which she tells of opening the New Testament more than once
in search of light, is somewhat long and self-conscious; here
1 Memoir IV, p. 30.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFJvxxvONbMhNZDacAWZg4zuhCz4q7bDgy2u6LDSlL_PPqAJp7MMB9rU81mbDxk1wJescG854KXKcVuzy84pgWlqFXraHBwZQcnmqm2aNzamYX_luI37rcBuioDM3tm0FLvXj9o-A=w491-h810-v0
perhaps she dramatizes herself a little. Once under way, the narra¬
tive proceeds swiftly and objectively. At the end, she makes some
trenchant criticisms of errors she has found in the best-known books
about the Fatima apparitions.
It was only last year, after a quarter of a century, that she was
permitted to return to the scenes she had described in that historic
document. Perhaps it was fitting that her triumph and vindication
should be reserved for the memorable pilgrimage of May 13, 1946.
The Second World War was over, and the Portuguese well under¬
stood from what futile horrors they had been saved. Although
rain fell all night and in the morning, a crowd of more than
700,000 pilgrims gathered in the Cova da Iria to give thanks to
Our Lady of Fatima. Almost a tenth of the population of the
country was there.
A second-hand but unforgettable impression of that demonstra¬
tion came to me in some motion pictures I saw two months later
at the Bishop’s house in Leina. The expanse of black bobbing
umbrellas, the Portuguese prelates and the Papal Nuncio humbly
standing in the rain, the thousands upon thousands of handker¬
chiefs that fluttered like the waves of a white sea or the wings
of innumerable angels beating the wind—there was something
unheard-of, almost apocalyptic in the magnitude, the fervor and
the patience of that prodigious host. For parallels one must go
back to the children of Israel singing with Moses in the wilderness,
or the medieval crusaders shouting back at a Pope Urban II or a
Saint Louis, “It is the will of God!”
Of the crusading enthusiasm of that pilgrimage, too, I obtained
some qualitative idea, at least, from the one I attended the following
July; for the pattern is much the same month after month. On
the twelfth, the roads are full of picturesque groups, men pre¬
dominating and most of them poor. By nightfall they are scattered
over the great bowl of the Cova da Iria, finding places to hitch
their burros or lay down their packs, to eat, to rest. Loaves of
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEs9Bgyt0ipK0K9bvNAqo_Js2SfiQ4DB_MEBLbhhzbbm-wQSn9IPX_4k1tYLfRF7L1Rp60SYv7KRojXjqWBWel9e7wzkS9PGg1iSjLF_fdcF2OjJgkmWjLz7_NiBviSSCvAszQpTg=w491-h810-v0
2,5 Our Lady of Fatima
tough brown bread and bottles of wine arc drawn from wicker
baskets, earthen water-bottles are passed around or replenished
at the holy well, blankets arc spread on the drv ground under the
olive or carrasqucira trees. 1 lere an old woman slowly advances
toward the chapel on bare and bleeding knees. There a stunted
peasant is warming some soup for his wife and children over four
candles, which he shields from the breeze with his body and his
sombrero.
All the crowd are well supplied with such tapers, each encircled
with a paper guard. By ten o’clock thousands of these tiny orange-
tinted lamps are burning as the procession begins to form; they
look strangely dim and ethereal as the full moon mounts higher
in the east, Hooding the Serra with an unearthly radiance and
lending a peculiar steely-blue cast to the infinite dome above.
As the wind comes stronger from the far ocean and the western
mountains, the torches flicker madly, yet few are extinguished.
Now they have assumed the order and form of a Ions’- strasjsilinw
procession that slowly moves up the .hill tow aril the main highway.
I lie resonant voice of a priest is heard on a loud speaker, leading
in the Rosary. Thousands of voices high and deep, male and female,
respond with a thunderous and passionate rhythm; Santa Maria,
mat dc Dens, rogai f>or nos pecadores agora e na bora da tiossa
mortal'1
The head of the procession has reached the top of the hill, has
turned, and is coming down another road toward the basilica. 1 he
slow majestic pace, the dancing of innumerable lights, the hoarse
and throaty voices convey an overpowering impression of an army
not of blood but of prayer, a host of crusaders bearing the light
of truth through the darkness of a hostile world, fearless of time
and death, certain of triumph. What can resist these voices and
footsteps of yesterday and of tomorrow?
Between the mysteries of the Rosary the marchers fling the Aves
of their favorite hymn to the metallic sky:
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEmS7fOFeq7Yq_IhcG2dRqRd6umOpxYymrWBog36LXhhZo63VNWFPlbWbWWy4k44-N8uARVPvAiGlP317XxWwKl1YcknANkcJENkOqNqcH4af6rrY7xQBW3dxj25VRy2l6CPo2_=w491-h810-v0
A treze de Maio
Na Cova da lria
Apar’ceu brilhanda
A Virgem Maria.
Ave, Ave, Ave Maria!
Ave, Ave, Ave Maria!
Individuals cry out between the strophes their own hopes and
supplications, sometimes with heartbreaking sobs: “Lord, we adore
you!” “Lord, we love you!” “Jesus, have mercy on us! Lord,
you can cure me if you will!” Yes, these voices seem to belong
to lustier and heartier times than ours. They come from the plain
of Esdraelon, from the walls of Jericho and Constantinople and
the fields of Tunis, like the pulses of faith and of human personality
breaking through the mediocrity and regimentation of a machine
age- The column of lights finally dissolves at the basilica. The
thousands slowly push their way inside to attend Benediction, and
then to form in long cues by the confessional boxes, patiently
waiting to tell their sms so that they can receive Holy Communion
at dawn. The prayers, the songs, the exclamations continue through
the night. But at two in the morning many thousands have
already disposed themselves for sleep. Around every tree, around
the well, around the concrete platform of the chapel of the appari¬
tions, one sees them lying prone in circles, the heads toward the
center, the bare feet of women and the hobnailed boots of men
grotesquely forming the perimeters. Here under one blanket lie a
young peasant and his wife. Under two or three others are huddled
a man and a woman and their four children. A baby is inert on
the breast of her sleeping mother. All are strangely