 a book open on her lap, sometimes
she would chat with some relative or friend while the young people
danced or jested. “She was always very serious,” according to
Lucia, “and everybody knew that whatever she said was like
Scripture, and that she must be obeyed in the house.” Some of
the visitors used to tell her that she was worth all of her daughters
put together. Perhaps that was an exaggeration, but she was not
displeased.
Maria Rosa was one of the few people in Aljustrel who could
read. “I don’t know why people like to gad about from house
to house,” she used to say. “All I want is to stay home quietly
and read. These books are very interesting. And the lives of the
saints—que belezal” Most of her books, in fact, were pious ones.
During the hours of the siesta in the summer and on winter
evenings she enjoyed teaching catechism not only to Lucia but
to other children of the neighborhood. In Lent she would read
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGKvE11dKK6EBuYuUtKoAlU5g_Odce_qBDsjT_F6_5dwsmQ6vIL1HrbU8wH-fZzkqY-o_a8PW-DNWTTXmQ3wOXDhIy2_hdVkw2in9OWRP2b9j25LA-cn3VNIULm-PkJ_mSdOS_QfQ=w491-h810-v0
accounts of the Passion of our Lord and books about the need of
prayer and penance. After supper, when Antonio and his son
Manuel had come frorri the fields, and the candles brightened
the glow from the hearth, the older girls and their father liked
to repeat old stones of giants, bewitched castles, enchanted prin¬
cesses. Lucia, of course, found these delightful. But her mother
would always seize the opportunity, in between the profane chron¬
icles, to tell something more edifying.
On Sundays Maria Rosa and her daughters—and sometimes
Antonio—would hear Mass at the village church of Fatima. This
has been greatly altered and in part rebuilt since 1917. The floor
of wide boards is halved by a tiled walk that runs from the main
door halfway to the altar; then, under a Roman arch, there is a
lift in the floor where the old church begins. The walls are tiled
in bright blue, white and yellow, from the floor to a height of
some six feet. On each side there is a confessional, and toward the
front of the church there is a third movable one for emergencies.
Instead of pews, there are long rough unstable wooden benches.
The bluish green ceiling is high enough to give an impression of
dignity and solemnity, if not of grandeur; the dome over the small
main altar is deep azure and studded with stars.
Some of the statues are extraordinarily lifelike. There is one
of Saint Anthony, for whom the church is named, in a glass case
for greater protection. Saint Francis stands near by, his brown
habit somewhat incongruously embroidered with gold, to suggest,
no doubt, his glorification in Fleaven; and the Child Jesus in his
arms has a lovely expression in his eyes, which follow the beholder
about in a way that must have made quite an impression upon
Lucia and other children. This is at the right of the main altar.
At the left, in front of the church, stands another which un¬
doubtedly, from her own account, had a strong influence upon
the mind of Lucia. It is one of Our Lady of the Rosary, clad in
a crimson gown and a blue mantle ornamented with gold, holding
in her arms a rather unhappy looking Child. Her own face is
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEoB8alsuxEBsaspa5yjmPcxwrdE9NZ5K_3qRchOzeDvE_QeWknyVDkufG4jTI9ztE5gMswJIAOPH-wIcs_lo783tlO8JFSQM8qD58iDznpUcMhgpjewjaZ1QHvOsKamd6tOlDNxw=w491-h810-v0
uncommonly serious, in fact almost severe and reproving, while
the glance of her light brown eyes is arresting and piercing, in
one hand she holds a rosary of fifteen decades. Below her there
is a statue of the girl martyr Saint Quiteria, in a pink robe spangled
with stars and a blue cincture. Here Lucia as a child often knelt
to pray.
Near the altar of the Sacred Heart now stands a statue of Our
Lady of Fatima. Her dark brown eyes look over the right shoulder
of the beholder with a soft and appealing affection; her robes are
pale blue. But this was not there in 1917.
On the right hand side of the church is a striking Crucifixion.
The Christus is very short and stocky, like a Portuguese of the
mountains, and is spattered with vivid blood from head to feet.
Above is an unusual picture of Our Lady of Mount Carmel. The
Child in her arms has a scapular in each hand, and both are gazing
out over a vision of hell, into whose flames are falling naked souls
of the damned; while others stand in peril, gazing sadly away
from the Mother and Infant, though on one side a youth is
being plucked from the pit by an angel, and on another a young
girl is saved.
On Sundays and feasts the church would be filled with people
from the villages of the Serra da Aire, and the open fields round
about would be full of family groups, with their earthenware water
jugs and lunchbaskets, their burros, mules and carts of various
sorts. From his house behind the church, with many a genial word,
the parish priest would pass. The bell in the steeple would fling
its clear tones for miles through the clean sunny air. The women
would crowd to the benches near the sanctuary, while most of
the men and boys, save those few who might be going to Com¬
munion, would stand in the rear; and then the Mass would begin.
It was customary for children at that time to prepare to receive
their first Holy Communion at the age of about nine or ten. It
was in 1910, when Lucia was three years old, that Pope Pius X
reminded the world of Christ’s command, “Suffer the little ones
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH2ZEM7gqF-4L2INPDAvO1yhGY0DzhBhniThcFJTY9wu5lOOHoP0K_dWvMvQfUw4ccTDrO9OcHP_9s-2mUdmGO9iDjby_puQRxhgddvxXyxJ6IsCuHiR8ToY8NhCONgPb0owUW5BA=w491-h810-v0
to come to me, and forbid them not.” Possibly Maria Rosa had
heard of this decree. It seems clear that she resolved, when her
youngest daughter was only six, that the time had come for her
to receive the hidden Jesus of the Blessed Sacrament; and aided
by Caroline, who was then eleven and had received, she drilled
her in the questions and answers of the penny catechism. When
at last she felt that her pupil was ready for an examination she
took her to the church.
The Prior received them with kindness, and then, sitting in a
chair on a platform in the sacristy, began to ask the child ques¬
tions. “Who made the world?” “How many gods are there?”
“What is man?” “Why did God make us?” “What must we do
to be saved?” And so on through the list that all Catholic children
study.
It seemed to Lucia and her mother that she had not done badly.
Yet after a little reflection the good priest decided that she was too
young, and had better wait for another year.
It was the very day before the First Communion. They had never
expected such a crushing blow. Almost stunned by disappointment,
they went from the sacristy to one of the benches in the church, and
sat with heads bowed, thinking. Lucia began to sob.
It happened that a Jesuit missionary from Lisboa, Father Cruz,
had been preaching a tnduum at Saint Anthony’s to prepare for
this First Communion, and was helping Father Pena to hear the
many confessions. As he passed through the church, he saw the
little girl in distress and stopped to ask what was the trouble. On
hearing the story he tested her with questions from the catechism,
and then took her back to the Prior in the sacristy.
“This child knows her doctrine better than many of the others
who are going to receive,” he said.
“But she is only six years old!” objected Father Pena.
The Jesuit persisted. He was a gentle and humble man, but
determined; and to the intense joy of Lucia, the Prior finally yielded.
Now she must go to the sacrament of penance, so that she could
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFXsAgJP4UMtV-WcDMv7mIUIaQrwHdERCpAAjFIAG9cVYlqphHpPnVX4LcLaDgdkGN09hjoyy3OgAShYTv0QPcwuSU-6XPSdtjcYEQVdGliOAsq4lgy9cKL9wdVbTjRiQ3UMbjIDQ=w491-h810-v0
offer a spotless heart and conscience to the divine Guest who was
coming next day.
It was at the movable confessional, which had been placed near
the sacristy door, that Father Cruz heard her first confession. What
a blessing! The famous Jesuit preacher was believed by many in
Portugal to be a saint; and he could hardly have talked even with
a small child without communicating some of his fervent love of
God. He was a tall man of fifty, much bent from study and
austerities. When Lucia had finished telling her peccadilloes, she
heard him say in a low voice:
“My daughter, your soul is the temple of the Holy Spirit. Keep
it always pure, so that He can carry on His divine action in it.”
She promised, and said her act of contrition. She asked Our Lady
to help her receive the Body and Blood of her Son worthily on the
next day. Then she arose, and returned to her mother.
Maria Rosa looked embarrassed and out of sorts, and the women
about her, for some reason or other, were laughing and whispering.
But Lucia paid little attention to this; she was thinking only of what
the priest had said. She knelt at the rail before the statue of Our
Lady of the Rosary, looked up at the sad face with the searching
eyes, and said to her:
“Please keep my poor heart for God.”
And “it seemed to me,” she wrote years later, “that she smiled,
and with a kindly look and gesture told me she would.”
Maria Rosa was waiting for her. “Don’t you know,” she
demanded as they started down the road to Aljustrel, “that your
confession is a secret, and must be made in a low voice?”
Lucia hung her head.
“Everybody heard you.”
Silence.
“They heard everything except the last thing you said to the
priest.”
Lucia scuffed resolutely along.
“What was the last thing you said to him?” asked her mother.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEgKe4_N-TiaLfp5dw4gav4hyKdbNaLMIS_DMU2FHFTQEb_vQkxGWVpIlQKeqpJXa2-XW-4p80PTVyQgSF64r8ZWFxCtfPpqboSf-4de7280qdYBVI4qy37g_d1MpUSZ0PkRbkz=w491-h810-v0
9 Our Lady of Fatima
No reply! Maria Rosa persisted all the way home, but she never
learned the secret. Lucia was always a reticent child. As soon as she
saw that anyone was trying to make her talk, she would take refuge
in a sullen silence that could be very exasperating.
That night her sisters worked late to get her ready for the great
event of her life. There was a new white dress to be fitted, a garland
of flowers to be woven to crown her dark hair. And when at last
they let her go to bed, she was unable to sleep, thinking of all that
had happened and all that was going to happen. What if nobody
woke her for Mass next morning? Every hour she got up to see
what time it was. It seemed as if the dawn would never come.
At last it did, however, and Maria came to call her. No doubt
she gave the usual caution not to take a drink, or eat anything, for
one must fast before Holy Communion. She made the final
adjustments of the white dress and the garland. Then she presented
Lucia to her parents, telling her that she must beg their pardon for
her sins, kiss their hands, and ask their blessing. The little girl
obeyed, and they blessed her.
“And mind you don’t forget to ask Our Lady to make you a
saint!” added Maria Rosa.
The family set out for the church. When Lucia could not keep
up with the others her mother scooped her up in her strong arms,
for it was late, and carried her the rest of the way.
There was no need of such haste. Some of the visiting priests
from distant places had not yet arrived, and the Missa Cantata did
not start for quite a while. This gave Lucia an opportunity to kneel
once more before the statue of Our Lady of the Rosary and carry out
her mother’s instructions.
“Make me a saint!” she whispered. “Please ask Our Lord to
make me a saint!”
Again she thought she saw the sad face relax into a smile of
encouragement. She was not the first to report such an experience
before a statue or a picture; there was little Saint Therese of Lisieux,
for example, among others. Nor does Lucia attach too much
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHeGtPr47RHz6bVqlByN6IF0pwRJFy4DGyrh3yGhpFt-BXcEzNMMxg1T6X5uzP0NQbQ2TalZ9Fldwyas2pjfNWjgy1S9c4X8d5P8u5glm8P_rm5M7KKSL68P05ToychzbPoe-ba=w491-h810-v0
significance to what theologians consider the least reliable sort of.
locution. “I don’t know whether the facts I have written about my
First Communion were a reality, or a little girl’s illusion,” she wrote
modestly when her bishop commanded her to commit all her
spiritual adventures to paper. “All I know is that they had a great
influence in uniting me to God all my life.” She remained so long
gazing at the smiling Madonna that her sisters had to come and
take her away. The procession was already forming.
Lucia was the youngest and smallest of the four long files of
children, two of girls and two of boys; and she was the first to
receive. When the priest placed the white Host on her tongue,
she felt, in her own words, “an unalterable serenity and peace.”
During all the remainder of the Mass she kept saying in her heart,
over and over, “Lord, make me a saint! Keep my heart always pure,
for You alone!” And she distinctly heard Him say within her,
“The grace that I grant thee today will remain living in thy soul,
producing fruits of eternal life.”
It was afternoon when the Missa Cantata ended, for the sermon
was long, and it took some time for the children to renew their
baptismal vows. When they were finally released, they trooped
out of the church and separated into little groups, shouting, talking,
running, some munching on pieces of bread their mothers had
brought.
Lucia remained kneeling in the blue and rosy light that came
through the stained-glass windows. Her mother was alarmed,
thinking she must be weak from hunger, and dragged her away.
But when they got home the child could hardly eat. She was
surfeited with the Bread of Angels, and she felt as if no other food
would ever attract or satisfy her. For a long time after that people
noticed that she seemed absorbed, abstracted, almost dazed.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFu0eYEZZWJQA0sUYjfXaGHdaavoPyTC1W9d6YOkfkVswk6ctjyn7ge2_On9gAwFsK8xUKzvuKwagRir90STmmuiMNA6pjwryRnCSDYC0HzicaUQhpdOzq0ItSCyCMyVej3SAIW=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER II
When Lucia’s second teeth began to come in, it was evident that
nature was not preparing her to be “Miss Portugal.” For they were
large, projecting and irregular, causing the upper lip to protrude
and the heavy lower one to hang, while the tip of her snub nose
turned up more than ever. Sometimes in repose her swarthy face
suggested a nature that could be sullen, stubborn and defiant, if not
perverse. But the appearance was deceptive, for under the stimulus
of any emotion, the light brown eyes could flash or twinkle, and the
little dimples that creased her cheeks when she smiled contributed to
an expression quite charming. Her voice was, and still is, rather high
and thin, Older persons often found her too silent and reserved,
though quick enough to obey and to help with her strong, stubby
hands. Younger children, however, were strongly attracted to her,
perhaps because she felt at ease with them and loved to tell them
stories by the hour. She had a gift for narration, with a sense of
humor and pathos, and under the awkward exterior the instinct of
the little ones discovered a sound intelligence and a warm and
motherly heart.
Among those most devoted to her were two of her numerous
cousins, Francisco and Jacinta (or Hyacinthe) Marto. At first
Lucia used to avoid them; in fact she found them rather tiresome
and troublesome. As they grew older they began to interest her,
and in time there was a perpetual running back and forth between
her house and theirs. They were the two youngest children of her
father’s sister, Olimpia of Jesus, and her second husband, Manuel
Pedro Marto.
Lucia was fond of her uncle and aunt. Ti Qlimpia had had two
children by her first husband, Jose Ferndandes Rosa; and by Ti
Marto, whom she had married in 1897 (when she was twenty-eight
and he twenty-four) she had nine more, of whom Francisco was the
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHKjH-1eERa6o7arkry4ZeWR2tGJnxSYDMd3Vj59uQ5_I1qAC7_8EtSQIuOE-NVBoZNZWLXPfhmgEkPxRJP7pax8KhTzyfw0AeojT20ixR0MDXyPjqyGQQrZkXTz6q03CAUMPxjGw=w491-h810-v0
eighth and Jacinta the last.1 Compared to sturdy Maria Rosa she
looked thin, tall and pale. But appearances are not always trust¬
worthy, for Olimpia has survived her sister-in-law by many years.
Her large hands are as capable as ever as she moves lightly about her
cottage at Aljustrel, and there is something strangely youthful in
the smile that comes easily to the toothless mouth and small shrewd
eyes of this woman of seventy-eight, who bore eleven children. She
gives the impression of having been a good companionable wife and
an affectionate mother, even though she never learned to read or
write. In spiritual matters she was content with a decent minimum,
and might have been satisfied with less but for the intervention of
circumstances hardly to be expected. When I made some remark
last summer about all the work she accomplishes, she said simply,
as if stating a fact rather than boasting, “I am a strong woman.”
Ti Marto is a man of exceptional character, who would command
instant respect anywhere. He must have seemed rather a romantic
figure to Lucia in the days when she and his children were growing
up together. He had the straight carriage, the cropped moustache,
the ‘‘butch” haircut, the quiet decisive manner, the sophistication
of outlook of one who had been a soldier in Africa, and had seen
something more of the world than the Serra da Aire. At seventy-
four he still stands quite erect, and keeps his gray hair and
moustache trimmed closely. He has generous ear lobes, keen honest
brown eyes, hands expressive and capable. He too never learned
to read or write. But unlike his brother-in-law, Antonio, he never
cared much for gaming or carousing. He worked hard, paid his bills,
saved a little for rainy days, of which there were plenty, and had
enough left over to