 silent and
motionless in the deathlike slumber of those who labor in the
fields and think nothing of walking fifty miles to honor the
Mother of God.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEZJz4ZWT50rGZAgueTkbyLjK1kA_VqeFAGc_H0ViB3EMf4eq288v3vNa-rKiR0GVAZoqNHX28kI6OVQrSJgBqtyyoVjprcXCEAuSBfrDQFevL6niw5kytXVXup5tCJw-s4QOWL-Q=w491-h810-v0
On the morning of the thirteenth, after a humble breakfast of
dry bread wherever they have slept, the people form another
procession, which follows the same route to the highway and
thence back to the basilica. This time the white statue of Our
Lady of Fatima has been taken reverently from the chapel, and
is born at the head of the column on the shoulders of six sturdy
men; while in front, leading this second crusading army in the
full glare of the summer heat, walk the Archbishop of Evora and
the Bishop of Leina. Dom Jose goes slowly and painfully, with
stiff and swollen knees, an ungainly but heroic figure in crimson
and geld. As he finally climbs the steps of the basilica he is
smiling graciously, and few can guess what it has cost a gallant
gentleman to pay his devoir to his Lady.
Perhaps the most moving of all the scenes is the one just between
the High Mass and the noonday Benediction. In a special place
roped off for them the sick are waiting patiently for this moment,
some on stretchers, some in wheeLchairs with nurses, some hobbling
on crutches; paralyzed children in the arms of mothers; the blind,
the emaciated. A priest descends from the basilica carrying the
Sacred Host in a monstrance. All who are able fall on their
knees as he passes between the rows of the doentes and holds
It up before the face of each, imploring the Lord to heal and
to restore. I will not attempt to describe those faces, those eyes;
there are no words for such love, hope, desperation, adoration.
One can only think of the atmosphere of the Gospels, as Lucia
has reminded us. “And Jesus went about all the cities and towns,
teaching in their synagogues and preaching the gospel of the
Kingdom, and healing every disease and infirmity. And seeing
the multitudes, he had compassion on them, because they were
distressed, and lying like sheep that have no shepherd.” 2 There
are no sensational episodes on this occasion; later, however, we
hear that a man from the north has been cured of cancer.3
2 St. Matthew, IX, 35-36.
3 Voz da Fatima, August 13, 1946.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGpgoCycX_TnTV9P02zwkilsPPfPANFmhqlN-VX9KxzijsW2x3Wlp52zPAJ7PtQxy7Lq-DlIFQ9GOxqPdl7uk63Ywu__axGE_Px_10tjhZ4vIzibmC-XO93OG-jw4p5YPQXPq3gXQ=w491-h810-v0
At last it is finished, and the statue is being borne back to its
place in the small chapel. All the people wave their handkerchiefs
up and down in farewell. The effect is tremendous; it is more
eloquent than all the shouts and the final Aves. But when the
figure of Our Lady has passed, the multitude quickly melts
away. Only a few small groups are still gathered here and there.
Still fewer have taken the trouble to follow the statue to its home.
There they are, kneeling about the humble building, still mutter¬
ing their love and their petitions—most of them women, and
very poor ones too in dusty garb, with black kerchiefs over their
heads, and bare feet. Among them on July 13 I saw Ti Olimpia,
the mother of Francisco and Jacinta, earnestly saying her Rosary.
Such, on a much grander scale and despite the rain, must have
been the atmosphere at the greatest of all the pilgrimages, the
one on May 13, 1946. On that day, too, as a climax, the three-
quarter-of-a-milhon pilgrims heard the voice of the Vicar of Christ
speaking from Rome; and the force of all his words tended to
heighten the impression of a modern Crusade.
“Your great concourse, the fervor of your prayers, the thunder-
of your acclamations, all the holy enthusiasm which vibrates
without cease in your hearts, and finally the sacred rite which in
this moment of incomparable triumph has just been performed,”
said the Pope, “call to Our mind another multitude innumerably
greater, other cries of worship far more ardent, other triumphs yet
more divine, another hour solemnly eternal, the endless day of
eternity when the glorious Virgin, triumphantly entering the
Heavenly Homeland through the nine blessed choirs of Angels,
was raised even to the Throne of the Most Holy Trinity, Who
placed upon her brow the triple diadem of glory, and presenting
her to the celestial court seated at the right hand of the immortal
King of Ages, crowned her Queen of the Universe. And the King
saw that she was truly worthy of such honor, glory and empire,
because more filled with grace, more holy, more beautiful, more
divine—incomparably more so than the greatest saints and the
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE1EQmAH-zVZ6bIctHQ7H-d5vuEw1zZK8bq5NrX_HURVHmYn-bH_u4NmPMmji5OK5gyDq7GNr_7aEUggPiCi2DVgpMWF56Zze1watwRfVb6lXNmeT3zIEevGt4pXGiBfU8OE2b1Kw=w491-h810-v0
sublimest angels; because she is . . . the first-born daughter of
the Father, pure Mother of the Word and beloved bride of the
Holy Ghost, because Mother of the divine King, of Him to
Whom from her maternal womb the Lord God gave the throne
of David and everlasting Kingship in the House of Jacob: He
Who Himself proclaimed to have received all power in heaven
and earth—He the Son of God decrees for His heavenly Mother
all glory, power, and majesty of His Kingdom. . . .
“So the Church salutes her Lady and Queen of the Angels and
Saints, of Patriarchs and Prophets, of Apostles and Martyrs, of
Confessors and Virgins; she acclaims her Queen of Heaven and
earth, most glorious, most worthy Queen of the Universe . . .
the light shining in the sky amid the tears of this exile. . . .
“You, by crowning the image of Our Lady of Fatima, signed
as it were a document of faith in her supremacy, a loyal sub¬
mission to her authority, a filial and constant correspondence to
her love. You did yet more: you enlisted as crusaders in the con¬
quest and reconquest of her Kingdom, which is the Kingdom of
God, that is to say you bound yourselves before heaven and
earth to love her, to venerate her, to serve her, to imitate her, so
that with her blessing you may better serve the Divine King; and
at the same time you bound yourselves to labor that she may be
loved, venerated, and served all around you, in the family, in
society, in the world.” 4
Sister Dores may have heard the Holy Father’s words, but she
did not see the demonstration. It was a week later, on May 20, that
she arrived, with the Mother Provincial of her order, at Cova da
Iria. She had left as an untutored girl of fourteen. She returned
a calm and poised woman of thirty-nine. Most of the countryside
was unchanged. But her brown eyes opened wide with amazement
when she looked down on what had been the wilderness of Cova
da Iria. It was partly inclosed by a wall. From two majestic gates
4 Voz da Fatima, June 13, 1946.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGh5btpZz3B9WWYiFbxm9twRieREy1pJDUqzAqyy8G5HFImpYrmgr2mIm0_VuF_MELM3E9BtTsueQHYUThWyz7swMsOdhppEksXbdB4-6ij27wJ4S8kRYX4BMSe_D-YIKe7rR77hw=w491-h810-v0
descended roads that joined at the miraculous fountain, and then
ascended to the lofty white basilica on the northern hill. The chapel
of the apparitions had been completely rebuilt. To the left was an
imposing hospice containing two or three chapels, the Bishop’s
quarters, and a seminary. On the opposite hill workmen were
laying the massive foundations of another such building. Ground
was being broken for an Italian seminary to the northeast. On
another hill stood the new convent of the Discalced Carmelite
nuns from Belgium.
Hardly anything was the same there except the carrasqueira
tree to which the children had fled from the first flash of light on
May 13, 1917- From one of its limbs hung an angelus bell, which
Joao, the lame son of Maria Carreira, would ring at suitable hours;
he also sold rosaries, and attended to the fountain. And hovering
birdlike about the chapel of the apparitions at almost any hour
one could see his mother—Maria da Capelhina, they now call
her—removing withered flowers from the place where the azinheira
had been, or going about on her hands and knees, dusting the
concrete floor with a whisk-broom.
Ti Marto was very much in evidence those days, wearing a
blue shirt, with a black tie on Sundays; and in the lapel of his
well-brushed coat the button of the Catholic Action League of
Farmers.
“Yes, I believed in it from the first,” he would say. “Once a
Spaniard came here and told me he could^look at the sun any
time. I dared him to prove it. He got under a fig tree and looked
up through the leaves. ‘Oho!’ said I, ‘come out here and look
at it.’ Of course he couldn’t. Then there was a Communist here
who said that it was all nothing but one great big stupidity. I
said to him, ‘Let me see you go back to your own town and
make a stupidity as big as this one.’ ”
When I asked him if he still hoed his maize and dug his
potatoes, he said apologetically:
“No, I don’t do much work now. I’m only seventy-three, but
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGUOdfXP5zPAvOLA4ikzBc-A2RuyFop8K1UoueEQchJ1tymkYUt6JVYGyDX-8Or6RPc1Xoe8jt3xdHuPhZdQ6sS1_FbvwGLJXLxcp8_AdYJxOsh_nB1RaHNEZWwqqQnYz26lMj69g=w491-h810-v0
my legs are no good any more—they’re almost as bad as Dom J/5 5 5
ose s.
Dom Jose, as the people affectionately call their Bishop, gives
the impression of never allowing his affliction to stand in the way
of anything he resolves to do; and the morning after the arrival
of Sister Dores he came from Leina to say Mass at the little
chapel especially for her.
Meanwhile the news of her coming had created quite a sensa¬
tion all over the Serra. Soon people were flocking from all sides
to catch a glimpse of her, and a crowd followed wherever she went.
Naturally she visited Aljustrel to speak with her sister Maria, her
aunt Olimpia, and other old friends and neighbors. She went
with Father Galamba, representing the Bishop, to verify all the
scenes of the events of 1917. She pointed out exactly where the
Angel had appeared at Cabe^o and at the well. She watched the
women washing their clothes at the Lagoa. A priest who saw
her standing at Vahnhos, gazing at the pile of stones where Our
Lady had appeared in August, 1917, told me he was much im¬
pressed by her detachment and lack of vanity. She seemed wholly
unaware that anyone was looking at her.
After a visit to the Church of Saint Anthony at Fatima, where
she noted all the changes and improvements, she crossed the road
and entered the creaking gate of the old cemetery. Where she
had left the little cross on the grave of Francisco, she found an
impressive monument inscribed:
HERE LIE THE MORTAL REMAINS
OF JACINTA AND FRANCISCO MARTO
TO WHOM OUR LADY APPEARED.
For Jacinta, too, had returned to Fatima, as she had promised,
long after her death. It was in 1935 that her body was taken from
the cemetery at Ourem, and laid in a common grave with her
brother’s. When both coffins were opened, nothing was found of
Francisco but his bones, but Jacinta’s face was intact and incor¬
rupt; she seemed to be only asleep, waiting for the Resurrection,
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQEE6C35z0ZMcyppdBpaWdEUghVb_FbNHEzdzZbw-RC1-hPpIoA01Z4q04HNzNEOCcVocK7BS6XuSbNuCw-vvnxfhzOhNFKY5qqq2plmuiwMFh9Lk7nXCEc5ZiUeFS9HY6KRmK4YUQ=w491-h810-v0
and the good odor of Paradise hung about her. Her mother was
one of those who saw her. Ti Marto told me he was there, but
could not get a very good look. “Ai, Jesus, there was such a crowd!
I couldn’t get near enough.”
Sister Maria das Dores went back to her convent. A few days
later the Bishop ordered evidence taken in the cause for the
beatification of those who, if these efforts succeed, will one day
be known as Saint Jacinta and Saint Francisco of Fatima.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHJnT02aSWlGdA3CmX5pWZ_SXN9ICj90cTJZGfPLIkZftYHhfinwXLrepV2xio3bpQe6Ce6MQxD1sjcJSnYEWToSyRZKQzZAGy7Wlb2M8qIwxj0IW4pycG6Q89nZ65_QUj-EbeKRg=w491-h810-v0
EPILOGUE
It was in the convent of the Dorothean Sisters at Vilar, near
Porto, that I had the privilege of conversing with Sister Maria
das Dotes on the afternoon of Monday, July 15, 1946. She seemed
uncomfortable at first, and probably was, for she dislikes such inter¬
views intensely, and submits to them only when ordered to do so.
She wrung her hands nervously. Her pale brown eyes looked
rather guarded and unfriendly. There was not much conviction
in the high and timorous voice.
A few moments later I had almost forgotten this first impression.
She had begun to feel more at ease. She laughed readily; and
when she smiled, a little dimple would appear on each cheek.
The voice now sounded natural and sincere. There was intelligence
in this face, too, and charm. It was impossible not to like her
and to trust her.
First I presented a few questions from America, some perhaps
a little obvious and unnecessary. One, from a sculptor, was
whether the rosary in the hand of Our Lady had had five or
fifteen decades.
“I didn’t count them,” she said quickly, with a mischievous
smile.
“When the Angel of Peace gave you Holy Communion at
Cabe^o, did it seem to you like a dream or a vision, or was it
like the reality of receiving Holy Communion in a church?”
She hesitated for the right word. “I cannot be absolutely sure
of that, because I was not in any ordinary state of mind during
such an experience, and there was something so intimate, so
interior, so intense about the apparition of the Angel and what
he said and did. But I believe it was like the real experience of
receiving in a church, for I felt the contact of the Host.”
223
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFykMpsOI4ti2Q82kvT5WTvhXESLNAdH6V8qr078wluMiJVDK3jp4tJnzB6Ku52cB_ntrQUo096fHIOdqlYLLGrGZVoRJUnJYvVuw-_jyzJNn1V7iS1voBf3XXBfTghOJI-xbQwDg=w491-h810-v0
224 Our Lady of Fatima
“Did you see Our Lord in the year 1927?”
“Twice.” The answer was prompt and matter-of-fact. I was
not permitted to question her as to what He said. Nor was I
allowed to ask about the conversations she has had with Our
Lady since 1917. It is well known that there have been several
such apparitions. According to the Voz da Fatima, published at the
shrine, the Blessed Mother said to her in her cell, on December
10, 1925: “Look, my daughter, at my Heart surrounded with
the thorns with which ungrateful men wound it by their blas¬
phemies and iniquities. You, at least, try to console me, and
announce that I promise to assist at the hour of death, with the
graces necessary for salvation, all those who, on the first Saturdays
of five consecutive months, confess, receive Holy Communion,
recite part of my Rosary, and keep me company for a quarter of
an hour meditating on its mysteries with the intention of offering
me reparation.” Sister Dores made this known, and it has given
great impetus to the Immaculate Heart devotion.
The interview continued:
“When you reported the words of the Angel and of Our Lady,
did you give the exact words as they were spoken, or only the
general sense?”
“The Angel’s words had an intense and overpowering quality,
a supernatural reality, that could not be forgotten. They seemed
to engrave themselves exactly and indelibly upon the memory.
It was different with the words of Our Lady. I could not be sure
that every word was exact. It was rather the sense that came to
me, and I put what I understood into words. It is not easy to
explain this.”
“Our Lady showed you many souls going to hell. Did you get
the impression from her that more souls are damned than saved?”
This amused her a little. “I saw those that were going down.
I didn’t see those that were going up.”
“Does the statue in the shrine at Cova da Iria look like the
Lady you saw there?”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQF3dw45H04yGo2yVutzoR_DIvgM7JnaxJGWYUfw9xMZf3rgxZBtlPxj9-E7jUdjmRfLErgejNPa_Ptc4NK931Bc7z8-0FKEF0ck-Of5C_8AM92TbItZS7wOLjgbZyNnE5U4lFLW2g=w491-h810-v0
“No, not much. I was disappointed when I saw it. For one
thing, it was too gay, too alegre. When I saw Our Lady she was
more triste, or rather more compassionate. But it would be impossi¬
ble to describe Our Lady, and it would be impossible to make a
statue as beautiful as she is.” She left the room a moment and
returned with a small print of Our Lady on some sort of trans¬
parent plastic material, the most simple and unadorned I had seen,
and handed it to me. “This is the picture that comes nearest to
what I saw,” she said. “Our Lady seemed to be made all of light,
and her garments were alsq. There sas no border of gold, no
ornamentation.”
“In many books about Fatima, the prayer Our Lady asked you
to say after the decades of the Rosary is given in some such form
as this: ‘O my Jesus, pardon our sins, save us from the fire of
hell, have mercy on the souls in Purgatory, especially the most
abandoned.’ Is that correct?”
“No, it is not,” she replied positively. “The correct form is
the one I have written in my account of the apparition on July 13:'
‘O my Jesus, pardon us, and save us from the fire of hell; draw-
all souls to heaven, especially those in most need.” 1
“Have you ever read the works of Saint Teresa of Avila?” I was thinking especially of the descriptions of uncreated light in the Libro de su vida.
“No. Parts of them were read to us in the refectory.”
“Have you had any revelation from Our Lady about the end
of the world?”
“I cannot answer that question.”
“Some persons believe that Jacinta’s vision of a persecuted Pope
referred to some particular Pontiff. Some believe the present Holy
Father was the one she saw.”
“Jacinta said it was a Pope. There was nothing to indicate any
particular Pope.”
1 "O men Jesus, perdoai-nos e livrai nos do fogo do inferno; levat as almtnhas
todas para o Ceu, prindpalmente aquelas que mats precisarem.”
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQECGUwSSu-iPjBzIl2n7tdsvAjmypKs6fshwvugbmroG5X9Su8fgecYpZZrmtbG9fNdVAgnN-C3RK1teOgJQeble3nomcZSzk0kAgdHI70LwqwKtlktXXKBNfpmzhQegybKwq19=w491-h810-v0
“Why did you say nothing about the Angel of Peace for so
many years?”
“Nobody told me to. I am under obedience. The priest to whom
I mentioned it at the time told me not to speak of it again. I
never did until the Bishop told me to write everything down.”
She explained the different effects of