 minutes more passed. The priest looked at his watch
again.
“Midday is past,” he said with gloomy finality. “Away with
all this! It is all an illusion.”
He began to push the three children with his hands, if we may
trust the memory of Maria Carreira.1 But Lucia, almost in tears,
refused to budge, saying:
“Whoever wants to go, can go, but I’m not going. Our Lady
told us to come. We saw her other times and we’re going to see
her now.”
Disappointed murmurs and grumblings began to be heard among
the bystanders. Then of a sudden Lucia looked toward the east
and cried:
“Jacinta, kneel down, for now I see Our Lady there. I can
see the flash!”
“Watch out, daughter!” It was the shrill voice of Maria Rosa.
“Don’t let yourself be deceived!”
Lucia did not hear the warning. Those near her noticed that
her face had become flushed and transparently beautiful. She was
gazing rapturously now at the Lady herself, who stood in a flood
of white light on the flowers that Maria Carreira had draped on
the stump of the azinheira. Jacinta and Francisco, on either side
of her, stared likewise, both radiant, both quite oblivious of the
multitude around them.
1 De Marchi, p. 175.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQFoRbEctVFEJ_oHLUlCymfl8HJYkH5AYzFLeXWbErzJJTz8dk4G-8x-CrxgCoruSaoJ6rgJnRw5Ego9utrqEbkHMHdNYWVOX5VP2VyYHttnqXDQQwI9a6gduypLmFX0IB_wSWpWUA=w491-h810-v0
“What do you want of me?” Lucia was kneeling with the
others. The fine rain fell on her upturned face.
“I want to tell you to have them build a chapel here in my
honor. I am the Lady of the Rosary. Let them continue to say the
Rosary every day. The war is going to end, and the soldiers will
soon return to their homes.”
“I have many things to ask of you,” said Lucia. “The cure of
some sick persons, the conversion of some sinners. . . .”
“Some yes, others no. It is necessary that they amend their
lives, and ask pardon for their sins.”
Her face became graver as she continued, “Let them offend
Our Lord God no more, for He is already much offended.”
With this the Lady of the Rosary opened her white hands as
always, and it seemed to Lucia that the light emerging from them
ascended, to where the sun ought to be, directly overhead, and it
was brighter than any sunlight. Perhaps it was at this moment
that the crowd saw the clouds separate like two vast curtains
rolled apart, and the sun appear between them in the clear
blue, like a disk of white fire. Certainly many heard Lucia cry,
“Look at the sun!” but she said this in ecstacy and has no
recollection of it. For she was wholly absorbed in something she
saw where the sun must have been.
As Our Lady disappeared in the very radiance that came from
her outstretched hands, there stood out in the zenith above three
tableaus which symbolized, one after another, the Joyous, the
Sorrowful and the Glorious mysteries of the Rosary. The first was
a distinct representation of the Holy Family: Our Lady herself
in her traditional dress of white with a blue mantle, and Saint
Joseph beside her holding the Child Jesus on his arm—Saint
Joseph in white, the Infant in bright red.
Lucia was heard to say, “Saint Joseph is going to bless us!”
All three of the children saw this first vision, and saw the Saint
make the sign of the cross three times over the crowd. The holy
Child did likewise.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE89teB-7M8h4ee3VlNW56ZZh4QtyPY5olar6ZvKcRD7pMEzQdq7ao_wvDijqMvFsm9h1Q3d87Yq_TCkvvboUZ11AFccYMYd2NGYHcoQmfPMagKvh0RIcl8zCb4vCpPIhtmYBGe=w491-h810-v0
iq8 Our Lady of Fatima
The next vision, seen by Lucia alone, was one of Our Lady
of Sorrows in the sombre garb assigned to her by tradition, the
Mater Dolorosa of Good Friday, but without the sword in her
breast; and beside her stood her divine Son grieving as when he
met her on the way to Calvary. Lucia saw only the upper part of
His figure. He looked pityingly on the crowd for whom He had
died, and raised His hand to make the sign of the cross over them.
Our Lady then appeared in a third vision of glory, as Our
Lady of Mount Carmel, crowned as queen of heaven and of
the world, her infant Son upon her knee.
The crowd saw nothing of all this: at least there seems to be
no solid verification of the claim that a few saw the Lady. What
they all did see, however, was something stupendous, unheard of,
almost apocalyptic. The sun stood forth in the clear zenith like
a great silver disk which, though bright as any sun they had ever
seen, they could look straight at without blinking, and with a
unique and delightful satisfaction. This lasted but a moment.
While they gazed, the huge ball began to “dance”—that was the
word all the beholders applied to it. Now it was whirling rapidly
like a gigantic fire-wheel. After doing this for some time, it
stopped. Then it rotated again, with dizzy, sickening speed.
Finally there appeared on the rim a border of crimson, which
flung across the sky, as from a hellish vortex, blood-red streamers of
flame, reflecting to the earth, to the trees and shrubs, to the up¬
turned faces and the clothes all sorts of brilliant colors in succession:
green, red, orange, blue, violet, the whole spectrum in fact. Madly
gyrating in this manner three times, the fiery orb seemed to tremble,
to shudder, and then to plunge precipitately, in a mighty zigzag,
toward the crowd.
A fearful cry broke from the lips of thousands of terrified persons
as they fell upon their knees, thinking the end of the world had
come. Some said that the air became warmer at that instant;
they would not have been surprised if everything about them had
burst .into flames, enveloping and consuming them.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQH9V-nPQvJ3ZczIPLEdA_QrYAdoG9bj3eWjoQKzFsEUyWKG-CNrbb5YLJMvRSD8wka632T2OZQTttD9CTmm5coU5EOlnR-SJfm5Uyr9PDDIotFFNSp5OvaGlc7RsgmsYddi1MU7ng=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 149
“Ai Jesus, we are all going to die here!”
“Save us, Jesus! Our Lady, save us!”
“Oh, my God, I am sorry—” And one began the Act of Con¬
trition.
Some who had come to jeer fell on their faces and broke into
sobs and abject prayers.
The Marques do Cruz said, “Oh my God, how great is Thy
power!”
This had lasted about ten minutes, perhaps. Then all saw the
sun begin to climb, in the same zigzag manner, to where it had
appeared before. It became tranquil, then dazzling. No one could
look at it any longer. It was the sun of every day.
The people stared at one another in joy and amazement.
“Miracle! Miracle! The children were right! Our Lady made the
miracle! Blessed be God! Blessed be Our Lady!” The shouts were
taken up all over the Cova da Ina. Some were laughing, others
weeping with joy. Many were making the discovery that their
drenched clothes had in some unexplained manner become per¬
fectly dry.
Avelino de Almeida reported the event in O Seculo of October
17 as “a spectacle unique and incredible if one had not been a
witness of it. . . . One can see the immense crowd turn toward
the sun, which reveals itself free of the clouds in full noon. The
great star of day makes one think of a silver plaque, and it is
possible to look straight at it without the least discomfort. It does
not burn, it does not blind. It might be like an eclipse. But now
bursts forth a colossal clamor, and we hear the nearest spectators
crying, ‘Miracle, miracle! Marvel, marvel!’
“Before the astonished eyes of the people, whose attitude carries
us back to biblical times and who, full of terror, heads uncovered,
gaze into the blue of the sky, the sun has trembled, and the
sun has made some brusque movements, unprecedented and out¬
side of all cosmic laws—the sun has ‘danced,’ according to the
typical expression of the peasants. . . . An old man whose stature
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG24DabglsRfgRR0TgJ8NCNmflpev2oINWDgHBe0kj4Onn1R32e0FrCk8C_RrY7VNOnOgfNP2CJZtCUh5H9ORiPtTpQ3L1go-CRKFzfrFLjdGxPecgTdkY7GQg4wKPHatI_kHwqbw=w491-h810-v0
*5° Our Lady of Fatima
and face, at once gentle and energetic, recall those of Paul
Deroulede, turns toward the sun and recites the Credo with
loud cries from beginning to end. I ask his name. It is Senhor
Joao Maria Amado de Melo Ramalho da Cunha Vasconcelos. I
see him afterwards addressing those about him who have kept
their hats on, begging them vehemently to uncover before so
extraordinary a demonstration of the existence of God. Similar
scenes are repeated in all places. . . .
“The people ask one another if they have seen anything and
what they have seen. The greatest number avow that they have
seen the trembling and dancing of the sun. Others, however,
declare that they have seen the smiling face of the Virgin herself;
swear that the sun turned around on itself like a wheel of fireworks;
that it fell, almost to the point of burning the earth with its rays.
. . . Another tells that he has seen it change color successively. . . .
“Almost three o’clock. The sky is limpid and the sun follows
its course with its habitual brilliancy so that no one dares to look
at it directly. And the shepherds? . . . Lucia, the one who speaks
to the Virgin, announces with theatrical motions, on the neck
of a man who carries her from group to group, that the war is
going to end and that the soldiers are coming home. Such news,
however, does not increase the joy of those who hear her. The
celestial Sign, that is everything. Much curiosity, nevertheless,
to see the two little girls with their garlands of roses; some try
to kiss the hand of the ‘little saints’; and one of the two, Jacinta,
is much nearer to fainting than to dancing. But what all aspired
for—the Sign in the Sky—has sufficed to satisfy them, to enroot
them in their Breton-like faith. . . .
“Their dispersion follows rapidly and without incidents, with¬
out the shadow of disorder, without the need of any intervention
of police patrols. The pilgrims who leave first, in haste to be on
their way, are those who arrived first with their shoes on then-
heads or hung on their staves. They are going, their souls full of
joy, to spread the good news in the villages that were not wholly
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGAdWNQT2o3Vs7T19XQtuRS_-pj1gtQuUdBMF5uqvsgD3jbyP7UsENXoAZJsfpp1WYLlKteujF9Mi8Li_nyO5JvDUDip2NpgmdjzvMxpoakiKlg8jN612FgZo0-QF0Z4gx0Mklx=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 151
depopulated to come here. And the priests? Some have shown
themselves on the scene, standing rather with the curious spectators
than in the company of pilgrims avid for celestial favors. Perhaps
now and then one does not manage to conceal the satisfaction
which appears so often on the faces of those who triumph. . . .
It remains for those competent to pronounce on the danse macabre
of the sun, which today, at Fatima, has made hosannas burst from
the breasts of the faithful and naturally has impressed—so witnesses
worthy of belief assure me—even freethinkers and other persons
not at all interested in religious matters who have come to this
once famous countryside.”
All over Portugal, in fact, the anti-clerical press was compelled
to bear witness of the same sort. There was general agreement on
the essentials. As Dr. Domingos Pinto Coelho wrote in O Ordem,
“The sun, sometimes surrounded with crimson flames, at other
times aureoled with yellow and red, at still other times seemed
to revolve with a very rapid movement of rotation, still again
seeming to detach itself from the sky, to approach the earth and
to radiate strong heat.”
Theories of mass hypnotism or suggestion were discarded when
it became known that reliable witnesses not in the crowd had
seen the miracle many miles away. The poet Affonso Lopes Vieira
saw it from his house at S. Pedro de Moel, forty kilometers from
Fatima. Father Inacio Lourenco told later how he had seen it from
Albunta, eighteen or nineteen kilometers away, when he was a boy
of nine. He and some fellow students heard people shouting in
the street near by. Running out of the school with his teacher,
Dona Delfina Pereira Lopes, he saw with amazement the spinning
and falling of the sun. “It was like a globe of snow revolving on
itself,” he wrote. “Then suddenly it seemed to come down in a
zigzag, threatening to fall on the earth. Terrified, I ran to shelter
myself in the midst of the people. All were weeping, expecting
from one moment to the next the end of the world.
“Near us was an unbeliever without religion, who had spent
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQE17b_O3UW9kGV6ajBRoUHbWqhjLtBxYX-Dco6ry6KvFwn5ep66sLb_Aapq8MLzu48CEyKw0qyPfVfoe1lXg4r_s1MSMTDhP46ne8trPtn9Kl5EFkxPIGPm5OZ7NYZtRaGA7PCa0Q=w491-h810-v0
x52 Our Lady of Fatima
the morning mocking the blockheads who had made all that
journey to Fatima to go and stare at a girl. I looked at him. He
stood as if paralyzed, thunderstruck, his eyes fixed on the sun.
Then I saw him tremble from head to foot, and raising his hands
to heaven, he fell on his knees in the mire, shouting, ‘Nossa
Senbora! Nossa SenboraF
“Meanwhile the people continued to scream and cry out, begging
God to pardon their sins. . . . Afterwards we ran to the chapels
of the town, which were filled in a few moments.
“During those long minutes of the solar phenomenon objects
all about us reflected all the colors of the rainbow. As we looked
at one another, one seemed blue, another yellow, another vermilion.
. . . All these strange phenomena increased the terror of the crowd.
After about ten minutes the sun returned to its place in the same
way it had descended, still pale and without splendor . . .”
Plenty of witnesses are still living in the neighborhood. I spoke
with many of them last summer, including Ti Marto and his
Olimpia, Maria Carreira, two of the sisters of Lucia (Mary of
the Angels and Gloria) and several others of the country folk,
all of whom told the same story with evident sincerity; and as
they mentioned the falling of the sun there was always a trace
of terror in their voices. The Reverend Father Manuel Pereira
da Silva gave me substantially the same details. “When I saw
the sun fall zigzag,” he said, “I fell on my knees. I thought the
end of the world had come.”
The fact has been established beyond any doubt. How is it to
be explained?
As early as May, 1917, Jacinta and Lucia had told people that
the Lady they saw had promised a miracle on October 13, at the
hour of noon, as a sign of their sincerity. They had repeated this
at various times, and had never altered their story even under
threats and persecution which must have been terrifying to such
children at the ages of ten, nine, and seven. On the very day
and hour they had foretold, some 70,000 persons testified that they
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQG6FNiI-RUlGDVQVgXfJZg5l1atwgiqGEFeT-b5tNxdyi1DCqPFzzy__8-JgtUmBdVRRUWP7HQNOfJBKu5VcIfcXjcqk0HsYdtbi667aEGLo3b3GbbTW1t_OOkSD47V4dLRWO4WMQ=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 153
had the unique experience of seeing the sun spin round and seem
to fall. Such widespread testimony serves to confirm that the chil¬
dren actually had seen the Mother of Christ, and that He had
given to the simple souls at Cova da Iria the sign in the sky for
which the Pharisees had begged Him in mock reverence, and which
He had refused to grant their unbelieving and adulterous hearts.
The Administrator of Ourem still denies that anything miracu¬
lous happened. I suspect he would have denied it even if he had
been there. Or like the Pharisees who denied the Resurrection
after they had seen Christ dying on the cross, he would have
made up some rationalistic explanation to save himself the humilia¬
tion of believing.
He was removed from office following the coup d’etat of
Sidonio Pais some two months after the miracle. The last heard of
him was that he was injured in Tomar by the premature explosion
of a bomb he was making to throw at certain members of the
new government.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQGloJorIN0UfsprgNLiPy8DRliihqRjg7wgTkIwO206POdXq8weU6_yi-lLNJbCHDcmAUF9J1o6MC2Mlu63MSGLssoJZ4dOIaqOEH_oifFm7f5EabcqRF1tQ8IYQr4lekAd25gZFA=w491-h810-v0
CHAPTER XIV
Lucia has drawn the mantle of a charitable silence over the
reactions of her family to the events of October 13. There must
have been apologies and acts of reparation, furtive, perhaps, on
the part of Antonio, honest and flatfooted on that of Maria
Rosa. But on that day the wan and spiritless girl had no time
to enjoy her triumph. Mobs of pilgrims followed her about all
afternoon. They were still milling about the street and passing
in and out of the houses of the Aboboras and the Martos when
Dr. Formigao arrived in Aljustrel at seven o’clock in the evening.
He wanted to talk with the three children before anyone else did,
and before they could compare notes. Thanks to his authority as
a priest he dispersed the strangers in short order, and then sum¬
moned the three principals to the house of Ti Marto, where he
questioned them separately.
All three had seen Our Lady stand on the stump of the tree.
Lucia and Jacinta were agreed as to what she said. Francisco had
seen her but had not heard her speak. All three had seen the sun
turn. All had seen, near the sun, the vision of the Holy Family.
Only Lucia had seen the two succeeding tableaus of Our Lady
of Sorrows and Our Lady of Mount Carmel. All agreed as to
the colors of the garments and other details. There were some
discrepancies. Was the Infant Jesus large? No, very little, replied
each one separately. But Lucia believed he was on the arm of
Saint Joseph, while both Jacinta and Francisco saw him standing
beside him—on the right side, said Jacinta, and he did not come
up to the waist of Saint Joseph. To Lucia he seemed about one
year old. To Jacinta and Francisco he was about the age of a
baby of the neighborhood, Deolinda de Jose das Neves, who
was .two years old.
https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/notebooklm/AKXwDQHGsclZzNofkkB8Q0mRCQYU_QuLsb2zTw22gvzUHeLItIQR4Py3sDWv0Khf1CkIqGAtoL-F10g4-fyOnxXE5fBY8fR2lxqoqij5E9lekGE-P-D8vhxdsaZtexqQfIn_NLYB7qdwhg=w491-h810-v0
Our Lady of Fatima 155
The divergence regarding the position of the Child is the only-
important one, and I confess I do not know how to explain it.
In all such