 already had these words written. 

86 [Once] when I saw how much my confessor [probably Father Sopocko] was to suffer because 
of this work which God was going to carry out through him, fear seized me for the moment, 
and I said to the Lord, "Jesus, this is Your affair, so why are You acting this way toward him? 
It seems to me that You are making difficulties for him while at the same time ordering him 
to act." 

Write that by day and by night My gaze is fixed upon him, and I permit these

adversities in order to increase his merit. I do not reward for good results but for 
the patience and hardship undergone for My sake. 


Vilnius, October 26, 1934. 



87 On Friday at ten minutes to six, when I and some of our wards [38i were coming in from the 
garden to supper, I saw t he Lord J esus above our chapel, looking just as He did I the first 
time I saw Him and just as He is painted in the image. The two rays which emanated from 
the Heart of Jesus covered our chapel and the infirmary, and then the whole city, and spread 
out over the whole world. This lasted about four minutes and disappeared. One of the girls, 
who was walking with me a little behind the others, also saw these rays, but she did not see 
Jesus, and she did not know where these rays were coming from. She was overwhelmed and 
told the other girls. They began to laugh at her, suggesting that she was imagining things or 
that perhaps it was light reflected by a passing airplane. But she persisted in her conviction, 
saying that never had she seen such rays before. When the others suggested that it might 
have been a searchlight, she replied that she knew very well what a searchlight was like, but 
never had she seen rays such as these. 

After supper the girl approached me and told me she had been so moved by these rays that 
she could not keep silent, but wanted to tell everyone about them. Yet she had not seen 
Jesus. She kept telling me about these rays, and this put me in an awkward situation, as I 
could not tell her that I had seen the Lord Jesus. I prayed for her, asking the Lord to give her 
those graces of which she had such need. My heart rejoiced in the fact that J esus takes the 
initiative to make Himself known, even though the occasion of such action on His part causes 
me annoyance. For Jesus, one can bear anything. 

88 +During adoration I felt God close to me. A moment later I saw J esus and Mary. At the sight 
of them I was filled with joy, and I asked the Lord, "What is Your will, J esus, concerning the 
matter about which my confessor told me to ask You?" Jesus replied, It is My will that he 
should remain here and that he should not take the initiative of dispensing himself. 

I asked Jesus whether the inscription could be: "Christ King of Mercy." He answered, I am 

King of Mercy, but He did not say "Christ." I desire that this image be displayed in 
public on the first Sunday after Easter. That Sunday is the Feast of Mercy. Through 
the Word I ncarnate I make known the bottomless depth of My mercy. 

89 +Strangely, all things came about just as the Lord had requested. I n fact, it was on the first 
Sunday after Easter [April, 1935] that the image was publicly honored by crowds of people 
for the first time. For three days it was exposed and received public veneration. Since it was 
placed at the very top of a window at Ostra Brama [Shrine of Our Lady above the "Eastern 
Gate" to the city of Vilnius], it could be seen from a great distance. At Ostra Brama, during 
these three days, the closing of the J ubilee of the Redemption of the World was being 
celebrated, marking the nineteen hundred years that have passed since the Passion of our 
Savior. I see now that the work of Redemption is bound up with the work of mercy requested 
by the Lord. 


90 One day, I saw interiorly how much my confessor would have to suffer: friends will desert 
you while everyone will rise up against you and your physical strength will diminish. I saw 
you as a bunch of grapes chosen by the Lord and thrown into the press of suffering. Your 
soul, Father, will at times be filled with doubts about this work and about me. 

I saw that God himself seemed to be opposing [him], and I asked the Lord why He was 
acting in this way toward him, as though He were placing obstacles in the way of his doing 
what He himself had asked him to do. And the Lord said, I am acting thus with him to 
give testimony that this work is Mine. Tell him not to fear anything; My gaze is on 
him day and night. There will be as many crowns to form his crown as there will be 
souls saved by this work. It is not for the success of a work, but for the suffering 
that I give reward. 

91 O my Jesus, You alone know what persecutions I suffer, and this only because I am being 
faithful to You and following Your orders. You are my strength; sustain me that I may always 
carry out what You ask of me. Of myself I can do nothing, but when You sustain me, all

difficulties are nothing for me. 0 my Lord, I can see very well that from the time when my 
soul first received the capacity to know You, my life has been a continual struggle which has 
become increasingly intense. 

Every morning during meditation, I prepare myself for the whole day's struggle. Holy 
Communion assures me that I will win the victory; and so it is. I fear the day when I do not 
receive Holy Communion. This Bread of t lie Strong gives me all the strength I need to carry 
on my mission and the courage to do whatever the Lord asks of me. The courage and 
strength that are in me are not of me, but of Him who lives in me - it is the Eucharist. 

0 my J esus, the misunderstandings are so great; sometimes, were it not for the Eucharist, I 
would not have the courage to go any further along the way You have marked out for me. 

92 Humiliation is my daily food. I understand that the bride must herself share in everything 
that is the groom's; and so His cloak of mockery must cover me, too. At those times when I 
suffer much, I try to remain silent, as I do not trust my tongue which, at such moments, is 
inclined to talk for itself, while its duty is to help me praise God for all the blessings and gifts 
which He has given me. When I receive Jesus in Holy Communion, I ask Him fervently to 
deign to heal my tongue so that I would offend neither God nor neighbor by it. I want my 
tongue to praise God without cease. Great are the faults committed by the tongue. The soul 
will not attain sanctity if it does not keep watch over its tongue. 

93 +A Short Version of the Catechism of the Vowsf39i 

Q. What is a vow? 

A. A vow is a voluntary promise made to God, to carry out a more perfect act. 

Q. Isa vow binding in a matter which is the object of a commandment? 

A. Yes. The carrying out of an act which is the object of a commandment has a double value 
and merit; and the neglect of such an act is a double transgression and evil, because by 
breaking such a vow we add to the sin against the commandment, the sin of sacrilege. 


Q. Why do religious vows have such value? 


A. Because they are the foundation of the religious life approved by the Church, in which the 
members bound together in a religious community undertake to strive always for perfection 
by means of the three religious vows of poverty, chastity and obedience, observed according 
to the rules. 

Q. What is the meaning of the words, "strive for perfection?" 

A. To strive for perfection means that the religious life does not in itself demand that perfection 
be already attained, but obliges, under the pain of sin, that we work daily to attain it. 
Therefore, a religious who does not want to become perfect neglects his principal duty of 
state. 

Q. What are "solemn" religious vows? 

A. " Solemn" religious vows are so absolute that, in extraordinary cases, only the Holy Father 
can dispense from them. 

Q. What are simple religious vows? 

A. These are vows which are less absolute - the Holy See dispenses from perpetual and annual 
vows. 

Q. What is the difference between a vow and a virtue? 

A. A vow pertains only to that which is commanded under pain of sin; the virtue goes beyond 
this and helps in the carrying out of the vow; on the other hand, by breaking the vow we fail 
in the virtue and do it damage. 

Q. To what do the religious vows oblige us? 

A. The religious vows oblige us to strive to acquire the virtues and to submit ourselves 

completely to our Superiors and to the Rules which are in force; thus the religious gives his 
own person to the Community, renouncing every right over himself and his actions, which he 
sacrifices to the service of God. 

The Vow of Poverty 

The vow of poverty is the voluntary renunciation of the right over property or to the use of 
such property with the purpose of pleasing God. 

Q. What objects does the vow of poverty concern? 

A. All those goods and those objects which appertain to the Community. We have no longer any 
right over anything that has been given to us, once it has been accepted, whether an article 
or money. All these donations and presents, which may have been given us out of gratitude 
or in any other way, belong by right to the Community. We cannot make use, without 
violating the vow, of any wages we may receive for work or even any annuity. 



Q. When do we break or violate the vow in a matter which entails the seventh commandment?

A. We break or violate it when, without permission, we take for ourselves anything that belongs 
to the house; when, without permission, we retain something in order to appropriate it; and 
when, without authorization, we sell or exchange something that belongs to the Community. 
When we make use of an object for some other purpose than that intended by the Superior. 
When we give to, or accept from another, anything whatsoever without permission. When by 
negligence we destroy or damage something. When, in going from one house to another, we 
take something with us without permission. In a situation where the vow is broken, the 
religious is bound to restitution to the Community. 

The Virtue of Poverty 

This is an evangelical virtue which impels the heart to detach itself from temporal things; the 
religious, in virtue of his profession, is strictly obliged to it. 

Q. When do we sin against the virtue of poverty? When we desire something, contrary to this 
virtue. When we become attached to something, and when we make use of superfluous 
things. How many degrees of poverty are there and what are they? 

A. There are, in practice, four degrees of poverty for one who is a professed religious: to 
dispose of nothing without the consent of the Superiors (the strict matter of the vow); to 
avoid superfluities and be content with necessities (this pertains to the virtue); to readily 
content oneself with things of inferior quality in what concerns one's cell, clothing, 
nourishment, etc., and to experience this contentment interiorly; to rejoice in extreme 
poverty. 

The Vow of Chastity 
Q. To what does this vow oblige us? 

A. To renounce marriage and to avoid everything that is forbidden by the sixth and ninth 
commandments. 

Q. Isa fault against the virtue a violation of the vow? 

A. Every fault against the virtue is at the same time a violation of the vow, because here there 
is no difference, as in the case of poverty and obedience, between the vow and the virtue. 

Q. Is every bad thought a sin? 

A. No, every bad thought is not a sin; it becomes so only when the acquiescence of the will and 
consent are joined to the consideration of the mind. 

Q. Is there anything, over and above sins against chastity, which is detrimental to the virtue? 

A. Lack of custody of the senses, of the imagination, of the feelings; familiarity and sentimental 
friendships are detrimental to the virtue. 


Q. What are the means by which this virtue may be preserved? 



A. To conquer interior temptations with the thought of the presence of God, and moreover to 
fight without fear. And for exterior temptations, to avoid occasions. There are, in all, seven 
principal means: to guard the senses, to avoid occasions, to avoid idleness, to remove 
temptations promptly, to remove oneself from all - and especially particular friendships, the 
spirit of mortification, and to reveal all these temptations to one's confessor. 

Besides this, there are also five means of preserving this virtue: humility, the spirit of prayer, 
modesty of the eyes, fidelity to the rule, a sincere devotion to the Blessed Virgin Mary. 

The Vow of Obedience 

The vow of obedience is superior to the first two. It is, to tell the truth, a holocaust, and it is 
more necessary because it forms and animates the monastic body. 

Q. To what does the vow of obedience oblige us? 

A. By the vow of obedience, the religious promises to God to be obedient to his legitimate 
superiors in everything that they will ordain in virtue of the rule. The vow of obedience 
makes the religious dependent on his superior in virtue of these rules for his whole life and in 
all his affairs. A religious commits a grave sin against the vow every time he disobeys an 
order given in virtue of obedience and of these rules. 

The Virtue of Obedience 

The virtue of obedience goes further than the vow; it embraces the rules, the regulations and 
even the counsels of the superiors. 

Q. Is the virtue of obedience indispensable for a religious? 

A. The virtue of obedience is so indispensable to a religious that, even if he were to perform 
good actions contrary to obedience, these would be evil and without merit. 

Q. Can we sin gravely against the virtue of obedience? 

A. We sin gravely when we scorn the authority or the order of the superior, or when spiritual or 
temporal harm to the community results from our disobedience. 

Q. What faults endanger the vow?

A. To be prejudiced against the superior, or to harbor an antipathy for him - murmuring and 
criticism, tardiness and negligence. 

The Degrees of Obedience 

Prompt and complete fulfillment - the obedience of the will, when the will persuades the 
intellect to submit to the advice of the superior. To facilitate obedience, Saint I gnatius 
suggests, moreover, three means: always to see God in our superior, whoever he might be; 
to justify in itself the order or advice of the superior; to accept each order as an order from 
God, without examining it or reflecting on it. General means: humility. Nothing is difficult for 
the humble. 



94 O my Lord, inflame my heart with love for You, that my spirit may not grow weary amidst 
the storms, the sufferings and the trials. You see how weak I am. Love can do all. 

95 +A Deeper Knowledge of God and the Terror of the Soul. 

In the beginning, God lets himself be known as Holiness, Justice, Goodness - that is to say, 
Mercy. The soul does not come to know this all at once, but piecemeal, in flashes; that is to 
say, when God draws near. And this does not last for long, because the soul could not bear 
such light. During prayer the soul experiences flashes of this light which make it impossible 
to pray as before. Try as it may to force itself to pray as it did before, all is in vain; it 
becomes completely impossible for it to continue to pray as it did before it received this light. 
This light which has touched the soul is alive within it, and nothing can either quench or 
diminish it. This flash of the knowledge of God draws the soul and enkindles its love for Him. 

But this same flash, at the same time, allows the soul to know itself as it is; the soul sees its 
whole interior in a superior light, and it rises up alarmed and terrified. Still, it does not 
remain under the effects of terror, but it begins to purify itself, to humble and abase itself 
before the Lord. These lights become stronger and more frequent; the more the soul is 
crystallized, the more these lights penetrate it. However, if the soul has responded faithfully 
and courageously to these first graces, God fills it with His consolations and gives himself to 
it in a perceptible manner. At certain moments, the soul, as it were, enters into intimacy with 
God and greatly rejoices in this; it believes that it has already reached the degree of 
perfection destined for it, because its defects and faults are asleep within it, and this makes it 
think that they no longer exist. Nothing seems difficult for it; it is ready for everything. It 
begins to plunge itself into God and taste the divine delights. It is carried along by grace and 
does not take account of the fact that the time of trial and testing may come. And, in fact, 
this state does not last long. Other moments will soon come. I should add here, however, 
that the soul will respond more faithfully to divine grace if it has a well - informed confessor 
to whom it can confide everything. 

96 +T rials sent by God to a soul which is particularly loved by Him. 

Temptations and darkness; Satan. The soul's love [for God] is still not such as God would 
have it. The soul suddenly loses the tangible perception of God's presence. Various defects 
and imperfections rise up within it, and it must fight them furiously. All her faults lift up their 
heads, but the soul's vigilance is great. The former awareness of the presence of God gives 
place to coldness and spiritual dryness; the soul has no taste for spiritual exercises; it cannot 
pray, either in the old way, or in the manner in which it had just begun to pray. It struggles 
this way and that, but can find no satisfaction. God has hidden himself from it, and it can find 
no consolation in creatures, nor can any of these creatures find a way of consoling it. The 
soul craves passionately for God, but sees its own misery; it begins to sense God's justice; it 
seems to it that it has lost all the gifts that God had given it; its mind is dimmed, and 
darkness fills it; unspeakable torment begins. The soul tries to explain its state to the 
confessor, but it is not understood and is assailed by an even greater unrest. Satan begins 
his work. 



97 Faith staggers under the impact; the struggle is fierce. The soul tries hard to cling to God by 
an act of will. With God's permission, Satan goes even further: hope and love are put to the

test. These temptations are terrible. God supports the soul in secret, so to speak. The soul is 
not aware of this, but otherwise it would be impossible to stand firm; and God knows very 
well how much He can allow to befall a soul. The soul is tempted to unbelief in respect to 
revealed truths and to insincerity toward the confessor. Satan says to it, "Look, no one 
understands you; why speak about all this?" Words that terrify it sound in its ears, and it 
seems to the soul that it is uttering these against God. It sees what it does not want to see. 

It hears what it does not want to hear. And, oh, it is a terrible thing at times like these not to 
have an experienced confessor! The soul carries the whole burden alone. However, one 
should make every effort to find, if it is at all possible, a well-informed confessor, for the soul 
can collapse under the burden and come to the very edge of the precipice. All these trials are 
heavy and difficult. God does not send them to a soul which has not already been admitted 
to a deeper intimacy with Him and which has not yet tasted the divine delights. Besides, in 
this God has His own plans, which for us are impenetrable. God often prepares a soul in this 
way for His future designs and great works. He wants to try it as pure gold is tried. But this is 
not yet the end of the testing; there is still the trial of trials, the complete abandonment of 
the soul by God. 

+ The Trial of Trials, Complete Abandonment - Despair 

98 When the soul comes out victorious from the preceding trials, even though it may stumble 
here and there, it fights on valiantly, humbly calling upon God, "Save me, I am perishing!" 
And it is still able to fight on. 

At this point, however, the soul is engulfed in a horrible night. It sees within itself only sin. It 
feels terrible. It sees itself completely abandoned by God. It feels itself to be the object of His 
hatred. It is but one step away from despair. The soul does its best to defend itself; it tries to 
stir up its confidence; but prayer is an even greater torment for it, as this prayer seems to 
arouse God to an even greater anger. The soul finds itself poised on the summit of a lofty 
mountain on the very brink of a precipice. 

The soul is drawn to God, but feels repulsed. All other sufferings and tortures in the world are 
as nothing compared with this sensation into which it has been plunged; namely, that of 
being rejected by God. No one can bring it any relief; it finds itself completely alone; there is 
no one to defend it. It raises its eyes to heaven, but is convinced that this is not for her-for 
her all is lost. It falls deeper and deeper from darkness to darkness, and it seems to it that it 
has lost forever the God it used to love so dearly. This thought is torture beyond all 
description. But the soul does not agree to it and tries to lift its gaze toward heaven, but in 
vain! And this makes the torture even more intense. 

If God wishes to keep the soul in such darkness, no one will be able to give it light. It 
experiences rejection by God in a vivid and terrifying manner. From its heart burst forth 
painful moans, so painful that no priest will comprehend it, unless he himself has been 
through these trials. I n the midst of this, the evil spirit adds to the soul's suffering, mocking 
it: "Will you persist in your faithfulness? This is your reward; you are in our power!" But 
Satan has only as much influence over the soul as God allows him, and God knows how much 
we can bear. "What have you gotten out of your mortifications," says Satan, "and out of your 
fidelity to the rule? What use are all these efforts? You have been rejected by God!" This 
word, rejected, becomes a fire which penetrates every nerve to the marrow of the bone. It 
pierces right through her entire being. The ordeal reaches its climax. The soul no longer looks 
for help anywhere. It shrinks into itself and loses sight of everything; it is as though it has 



accepted the torture of being abandoned. This is a moment for which I have no words. This is 
the agony of the soul. 

99 When for the first time this moment was drawing near, I was snatched from it by virtue of 
holy obedience. The Directress of Novices, alarmed by my appearance, sent me off to 
confession, but the confessor did not understand me, and I experienced no relief whatsoever. 
0 Jesus, give us experienced priests!

When I told this priest I was undergoing infernal tortures, he answered that he was not 
worried about my soul, because he saw in it a great grace of God. But I understood nothing 
of this, and not even the least glimmer of light broke through to my soul. 

100 Then my physical strength began to fail me, and I could no longer carry out my duties. Nor 
could I any longer hide my sufferings. Although I did not say a word about them, the look of 
pain on my face betrayed me. The Superior told me that the sisters had come to her saying 
that, when they look at me in the chapel, they are moved to pity because I look so terrible. 
Yet, despite all efforts, the soul is unable to conceal such suffering. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-50 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 45 1-500 t 501-521 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1 201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-132 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401-1450 t 451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804- 828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 


Notebook 1 


101 J esus, You alone know how the soul, engulfed in darkness, moans in the midst of these 
torments and, despite all this, thirsts for God as burning lips thirst for water. It dies and 
withers; it dies a death without death; that is to say, it cannot die. All its efforts come to 
nothing; it is under a powerful hand. Now the soul comes under the power of the J ust One. 

All exterior temptations cease; all that surrounds it becomes silent, like a dying person who 
loses contact with everything around it: the person's entire soul is in the hand of the J ust 
God, the Thrice-Holy God, -rejected for all eternity! This is the culminating moment, and God 
alone can test a soul in this way, because He alone knows what the soul can endure. 

When the soul has been saturated through and through by this infernal fire, it is, as it were, 
cast headlong into great despair. My soul experienced this moment when I was all alone in 
my cell. When my soul began to sink into this despair, I felt that the end was near. But I 
seized my little crucifix and clutched it tightly in my hand. And now I felt my body separate 
itself from my soul; and though I wanted to go to my Superiors, I no longer had the physical 
strength. I uttered my last words: "I trust in Your Mercy! "-and it seemed to me that I 
provoked God to an even greater anger. And now I was drowned in despair, and all that was 
left me was a moan of unadulterated pain which, from time to time, tore itself from my soul. 
The soul is in agony-and it seemed to me that I would remain in this state, because by my 
own strength I could not emerge from it. Every recollection of God opened up an 
unspeakable ocean of suffering, and yet despite this there is something within the soul which 
is drawn to Him, though it seems to her for this only-that she suffer more. The memory of 
the love with which God formerly surrounded it is still another kind of suffering. His gaze 
pierces it, and everything within the soul is burned by this gaze. 

102 After some time, one of the sisters came into the cell and found me almost dead. She was 
frightened and went to find the Directress of Novices who, in the name of holy obedience 
ordered me to get up from the ground. My strength returned immediately, and I got up, 
trembling. The Directress recognized immediately the state of my soul and spoke to me 
about the inscrutable mercy of God, saying, "Do not be distressed about anything, Sister. I 
command this of you in virtue of obedience." Then she said to me, "I see now, Sister, that 
God is calling you to a high degree of holiness; the Lord wants to draw you very close to 
Himself since He has allowed these things to happen to you so soon. Be faithful to God, 

Sister, because this is a sign that He wants you to have a high place in heaven." However, I 
did not understand anything of these words. When I went into the chapel, I felt as though my

soul had been set free from everything, as though I had just come forth from the hand of 
God. I perceived the inviolability of my soul; I felt that I was a tiny child. 



103 Suddenly I saw the Lord interiorly, and He said to me, Fear not. My daughter; I am with 
you. In that single moment, all the darkness and torments vanished, my senses were 
inundated with unspeakable joy, [and] the faculties of my soul filled with light. 

104 I want to add that, although my soul was already in the rays of His love, traces of my past 
tortures remained on my body for two days: a deathly pale face and bloodshot eyes. Jesus 
alone knows what I suffered. What I have written is very poor compared to the reality. I 
cannot put it in words; it seemed to me that I had come back from the other world. I feel an 
aversion for everything that is created; I snuggle to the heart of God like a baby to its 
mother's breast. I see everything differently now. I am conscious of what the Lord, by one 
single word, has done in my soul, and I live by it. I shudder at the recollection of this past 
torture. I would not have believed that one could suffer so, if I had not gone through it 
myself. This is a completely spiritual suffering. 

105 However, in all these sufferings and struggles, I was not omitting Holy Communion. When it 
seemed to me that I should not communicate, I went, before Holy Communion, to the 
Directress and told her that I could not approach the Sacrament, because it seemed to me 
that I should not do so. But she would not permit me to omit Holy Communion, so I went, 
and I understand now that it was only obedience that saved me. 

The Directress herself told me later that my trials had passed quickly, "and this solely 
because you were obedient, Sister; and it was through the power of obedience that you 
struggled through this so bravely." It is true that it was the Lord himself who brought me out 
of this torment, but my fidelity to obedience did please Him. 

106 Though these are frightening things, the soul should not be too fearful, because God will 
never test us beyond what we are able to bear. On the other hand, He may never send us 
such sufferings, but I write this because, if it pleases the Lord to let a soul pass through such 
sufferings, it should not be afraid but, insofar as this depends on the soul itself, it should 
remain faithful to God. God will do a soul no harm, because He is Love itself, and in this 
unfathomable love has called it into being. However, when I was so tormented, I myself did 
not understand this. 

107 O my God, I have come to know that I am not of this earth; You, O Lord, have poured this 
profound awareness into my soul. My communion is more with heaven than with earth, 
though I in no way neglect my duties. 

108 During those times, I had no spiritual director; I was without any kind of guidance whatever. 

I begged the Lord, but He did not give me a director. Jesus himself has been my Master from 
the days of my infancy up to the present moment. He accompanied me across all the deserts 
and through all dangers. I see clearly that God alone could have led me through such great 
perils unharmed, with my soul untarnished and passing victoriously through all difficulties, 
immense though they were. Going out[ ...] Later on, the Lord did give me a director. 



109 After such sufferings the soul finds itself in a state of great purity of spirit and very close to 
God. But I should add that during these spiritual torments it is close to God, but it is blind. 
The soul's vision is plunged into darkness, and though God is nearer than ever to the soul 
which is suffering, the whole secret consists in the fact that it knows nothing of this. The soul 
in fact declares that, not only has God abandoned it, but it is the object of His hatred. With 
how great a malady are they eyes of the soul afflicted! When struck by divine light, the soul 
affirms that this light does not exist, although it is precisely because this divine light is so 
bright that it is blinded. Yet despite all, I learned later that God is closer to a soul at such 
moments than at others, because it would not be able to endure these trials with the help of 
ordinary grace alone. God's omnipotence and an extraordinary grace must be active here, for 
otherwise the soul would succumb at the first blow. 

110 O Divine Master, what happens in my soul is Your work alone! You, 0 Lord, are not afraid to

place the soul on the edge of a terrible precipice where it stands, alarmed and filled with 
fright, and then You call it back again to Yourself. These are Your imponderable mysteries. 

111 When, in the midst of these interior torments, I tried to accuse myself in confession of the 
smallest trifles, the priest was surprised that I had not committed graver faults, and he said 
to me, "If you are as faithful as this to God during these sufferings, this in itself is evidence 
to me that God is sustaining you, Sister, with a special grace, and it is a good thing that you 
do not understand this." It is a strange thing, nevertheless, that confessors could neither 
understand me nor set my mind at peace concerning these matters, until I met Father 
Andrasz and, later on, Father Sopocko. 

112 +A few words about confession and confessors. I shall speak only of what I have experienced 
and gone through within my own soul. There are three things which hinder the soul from 
drawing profit from confession in these exceptional moments. 

The first thing: when the confessor has little knowledge of extraordinary ways and shows 
surprise if a soul discloses to him the great mysteries worked in it by God. Such surprise 
frightens a sensitive soul, and it notices that the confessor hesitates to give his opinion; and 
if it does notice this, it will not be set at peace, but will have even more doubts after 
confession than before, because it will sense that the confessor is trying to set it at peace 
while he himself is uncertain. Or else, as has happened to me, a confessor, unable to 
penetrate some of the soul's mysteries, refuses to hear the confession, showing a certain 
fear when the soul approaches the confessional. 

How can a soul in this state obtain peace in the confessional when it has become so 
oversensitive to every word of the priest? In my opinion, at times of such special trials sent 
by God to a soul, the priest, if he does not understand the soul, should direct it to some 
other experienced and well- instructed confessor. Or else he himself should seek light in order 
to give the soul what it needs, instead of downrightly denying it confession. For in this way 
he is exposing the soul to a great danger; and more than one soul may well leave the road 
along which God wanted it to journey. This is a matter of great importance, for I have 
experienced it myself. I myself began to waver; despite special gifts from God, and even 
though God himself reassured me, I have nevertheless always wanted to have the Church's 
seal as well. 

The second thing: the confessor does not allow the soul to express itself frankly, and shows 
impatience. The soul then falls silent and does not say everything [it has to say] and, by this, 
profits nothing. It profits even less when the confessor, without really knowing the soul, 
proceeds to put it to the test. Instead of helping the soul, he does it harm. The soul is aware 



that the confessor does not know it, because he did not allow it to lay itself open fully as 
regards both its graces and its misery. And so the test is ill-adapted. I have been submitted 
to some tests at which I have had to laugh. 

I will express this better thus: The confessor is the doctor of the soul, but how can a doctor 
prescribe a suitable remedy if he does not know the nature of the sickness? Never will he be 
able to do so. For either the remedy will not produce the desired effect, or else it will be too 
strong and will aggravate the illness, and sometimes-God forbid-even bring about death. I 
am speaking from my own experience because, in certain instances, it was the Lord himself 
who directly sustained me. 

The third thing: it also happens sometimes that the confessor makes light of little things. 
There is nothing little in the spiritual life. Sometimes a seemingly insignificant thing will 
disclose a matter of great consequence and will be for the confessor a beam of light which 
helps him to get to know the soul. Many spiritual undertones are concealed in little things. 

A magnificent building will never rise if we reject the insignificant bricks. God demands great 
purity of certain souls, and so He gives them a deeper knowledge of their own misery. 
Illuminated by light from on high, the soul can better know what pleases God and what does 
not. Sin depends upon the degree of knowledge and light that exists within the soul. The

same is true of imperfections. Although the soul knows that it is only sin in the strict sense of 
the term which pertains to the sacrament of penance, yet these petty things are of great 
importance to a soul which is tending to sanctity, and the confessor must not treat them 
lightly. The patience and kindness of the confessor open the way to the innermost secrets of 
the soul. The soul, unconsciously as it were, reveals its abysmal depth and feels stronger and 
more resistant; it fights with greater courage and tries to do things better because it knows it 
must give an account of them. 

I will mention one more thing regarding the confessor. It is his duty to occasionally put to the 
test, to try, to exercise, to learn whether he is dealing with straw, with iron or with pure gold. 
Each of these three types of souls needs different kinds of training. The confessor must-and 
this is absolutely necessary-form a clear judgment of each soul in order to know how heavy a 
burden it can carry at certain times, in certain circumstances, or in particular situations. As 
for myself, it was only later on, after many [negative] experiences, that, when I saw that I 
was not understood, I no longer laid bare my soul or allowed my peace to be disturbed. But 
this happened only when all these graces had already been submitted to the judgement of a 
wise, well-instructed and experienced confessor. Now I know what to go by in certain cases. 

113 And again, I would like to say three words to the soul that is determined to strive for sanctity 
and to derive fruit; that is to say, benefit from confession. 

First word-complete sincerity and openness. Even the holiest and wisest confessor cannot 
forcibly pour into the soul what he desires if it is not sincere and open. An insincere, 
secretive soul risks great dangers in the spiritual life, and even the Lord Jesus Himself does 
not give Himself to such a soul on a higher level, because He knows it would derive no 
benefit from these special graces. 

Second word-humility. A soul does not benefit as it should from the sacrament of confession 
if it is not humble. Pride keeps it in darkness. The soul neither knows how, nor is it willing, to 
probe with precision the depths of its own misery. It puts on a mask and avoids everything 
that might bring it recovery. 



Third word-obedience. A disobedient soul will win no victory, even if the Lord Jesus himself, 
in person, were to hear its confession. The most experienced confessor will be of no help 
whatsoever to such a soul. The disobedient soul exposes itself to great misfortunes; it will 
make no progress toward perfection, nor will it succeed in the spiritual life. God lavishes His 
graces most generously upon the soul, but it must be an obedient soul. 

114 +Oh, how pleasing are the hymns flowing from a suffering soul! All heaven delights in such a 
soul, especially when it is tested by God. It mournfully sings out its longing for Him. Great is 
its beauty, because it comes from God. The soul walks through the jungle of life, wounded by 
God's love. With one foot only it touches the ground. 

115 + When a soul has come out of these tribulations, it is deeply humble. Its purity of soul is 
great. It knows better without need of reflecting, as it were, what it ought to do at a given 
moment and what to forbear. It feels the lightest touch of grace and is very faithful to God. It 
recognizes God from afar and continuously rejoices in Him. It discovers God very quickly in 
other souls and in its environment in general. The soul has been purified by God himself. 

God, as Pure Spirit, introduces the soul to a life which is purely spiritual. God himself has first 
prepared and purified the soul; that is, He has made it capable of close communion with 
himself. The soul, in a state of loving repose, communes spiritually with the Lord. It speaks 
to God without the need of expressing itself through the senses. God fills it with His light. 

The enlightened mind sees clearly and distinguishes the various degrees of the spiritual life. 

It recognizes [that state] when its union with God was imperfect: where the senses were 
involved, and the spirit was linked with the senses in a manner-exalted and special, to be 
sure but not yet perfect. There is a higher and more perfect union with God; namely, 
intellectual union. Here, the soul is safer from illusions; its spirituality is purer and more

profound. In a life where the senses are involved, there is more danger of illusion. Both for 
the soul and for its confessor, prudence must play a greater part. There are moments when 
God introduces the soul to a purely spiritual state. The senses dim and are seemingly dead. 
The soul is most closely united to God; it is immersed in the Deity; its knowledge is complete 
and perfect, not sporadic as before, but total and absolute. It rejoices in this. But I want to 
say more about those moments of trial; at those times the confessor must have patience 
with such a soul. But the soul must have even greater patience with itself. 

116 My J esus, You know what my soul goes through at the recollection of these sufferings. I have 
often marvelled that the angels and saints hold their peace at the sight of a soul suffering 
like that. Yet they have special love for us at such moments. My soul has often cried out after 
God, as a little child who cries as loudly as he can when his mother covers her face and he 
cannot recognize her. 0 my J esus, honor and glory to You for these trials of love! Great and 
incomprehensible is your mercy. All that You intended for my soul, O Lord, is steeped in Your 
mercy. 



117 I will mention here that those who live with such a person should not add external sufferings; 
for indeed, when the soul's cup is full, the little drop we may add to it may be the one drop 
too much, and the cup of bitterness will overflow. And who will answer for such a soul? Let us 
beware of adding to the suffering of others, because that is displeasing to the Lord. If the 
sisters or the superiors knew or even suspected that a soul was suffering such trials, and 
they nevertheless added still other sufferings, they would be sinning gravely, and God 
himself would demand an account of them on behalf of such a soul. I am not speaking here 
of instances which of their very nature are sinful, but of things which in other circumstances 
would not be sinful. Let us be on our guard against having the weight of such a soul on our 
conscience. This is a grave and common defect in religious life; namely, that when one sees 

a suffering soul, one always wants to add even more suffering. I do not say that everyone 
acts like this, but there are some. We take the liberty of passing all sorts of judgments, and 
we repeat them when we would do better to remain silent. 

118 The tongue is a small member, but it does big things. A religious who does not keep silence 
will never attain holiness; that is, she will never become a saint. Let her not delude herself- 
unless it is the Spirit of God who is speaking through her, for then she must not keep silent. 
But, in order to hear the voice of God, one has to have silence in one's soul and to keep 
silence; not a gloomy silence, but an interior silence; that is to say, recollection in God. One 
can speak a great deal without breaking silence and, on the contrary, one can speak little 
and be constantly breaking silence. Oh, what irreparable damage is done by the breach of 
silence! We cause a lot of harm to our neighbor, but even more to our own selves. 

In my opinion, and according to my experience, the rule concerning silence should stand in 
the very first place. God does not give himself to a chattering soul which, like a drone in a 
beehive, buzzes around but gathers no honey. A talkative soul is empty inside. It lacks both 
the essential virtues and intimacy with God. A deeper interior life, one of gentle peace and of 
that silence where the Lord dwells, is quite out of the question. A soul that has never tasted 
the sweetness of inner silence is a restless spirit which disturbs the silence of others. I have 
seen many souls in the depths of hell for not having kept their silence; they told me so 
themselves when I asked them what was the cause of their undoing. These were souls of 
religious. My God, what an agony it is to think that not only might they have been in heaven, 
but they might even have become saints! 0 Jesus, have mercy! 

119 I tremble to think that I have to give an account of my tongue. There is life, but there is also 
death in the tongue. Sometimes we kill with the tongue: we commit real murders. And we 
are still to regard that as a small thing? I truly do not understand such consciences. I have 
known a person who, when she learned from someone that a certain thing was being said

about her, fell seriously ill. She lost a good deal of blood and shed many tears, and the 
outcome was very sad. It was not the sword that did all this, but the tongue. O my silent 
Jesus, have mercy on us! 



120 I have wandered onto the subject of silence. But this is not what I wanted to speak about, 
but rather about the soul's life with God and about its response to grace. When a soul has 
been cleansed, and the Lord is on intimate terms with it, it begins to apply all its inner force 
in striving after God. Yet the soul cannot do anything of itself. God alone arranges 
everything. The soul knows this and is mindful of it. It is still in exile and understands well 
that there may yet come cloudy and rainy days, but it must now look upon things differently 
from what it had up to now. It does not seek reassurance in a false peace, but makes ready 
for battle. It knows it comes from a warrior race. It is now much more aware of everything. 

It knows that it is of royal stock. It is concerned with all that is great and holy. 

121 +There is a series of graces which God pours into the soul after these trials by fire. The soul 
enjoys intimate union with God. It has many visions, both corporeal and intellectual. It hears 
many supernatural words, and sometimes distinct orders. But despite these graces, it is not 
self-sufficient. In fact it is even less so as a result of God's graces, because it is now open to 
many dangers and can easily fall prey to illusions. It ought to ask God for a spiritual director; 
but not only must it pray for one, it must also make every effort to find a leader who is an 
expert in these things, just as a military leader must know the ways along which he will lead 
[his followers] into battle. A soul that is united with God must be prepared for great and hard- 
fought battles. 

-i-After these purifications and tears, God abides in the soul in a special way, but the soul 
does not always cooperate with these graces. Not that the soul itself is not willing to work, 
but it encounters so many interior and exterior difficulties that it really takes a miracle to 
sustain the soul on these summits. In this, it absolutely needs a director. People have often 
sown doubt in my soul, and I myself have sometimes become frightened at the thought that 
I was, after all, an ignorant person and did not have knowledge of many things, above all, 
spiritual things. But when my doubts increased, I sought light from my confessor or my 
superiors. Yet I did not obtain what I desired. 

122 When I opened myself up to my superiors, one of them [probably Mother Michael or Mother 
Mary Joseph] understood my soul and the road God intended for me. When I followed her 
advice, I made quick progress towards perfection. But this did not last long. When I opened 
up my soul still more deeply, I did not obtain what I desired; it seemed to my superior that 
these graces [of which I was the object] were unlikely, and so I could not draw any further 
help from her. She told me it was impossible that God should commune with His creatures in 
such a way: "I fear for you, Sister; isn't this an illusion of some sort! You'd better go and 
seek the advice of a priest." But the confessor did not understand me and said, "You'd better 
go, Sister, and talk about these matters with your superiors." And so I would go from the 
superiors to the confessor and from the confessor to the superiors, and I found no peace. 
These divine graces became a great suffering for me. And more than once I said to the Lord 
directly, "J esus, I am afraid of You; could You not be some kind of a ghost?" J esus always 
reassured me, but I still continued to be incredulous. It is a strange thing however: the more 
I became incredulous, the more J esus gave me proofs that these things came from Him. 



123 +When I saw that my mind was not being set at rest by my superiors, I decided to say 
nothing [to them] of these purely interior matters. Exteriorly I tried, as a good nun should, to 
tell everything to my superiors, but as for the needs of my soul, I spoke about these only in 
the confessional. For many very good reasons, I learned that a woman is not called to 
discern such mysteries. I laid myself open to much unnecessary suffering. For quite a long 
time I was regarded as one possessed by the evil spirit, and I was looked upon with pity, and 
the superior took certain precautionary actions in my respect. It reached my ears that the

sisters also regarded me as such. And the sky grew dark around me. I began to shun these 
divine graces, but it was beyond my power to do so. Suddenly I would be enveloped in such 
recollection that, against my will, I was immersed in God, and the Lord kept me completely 
dependent upon Himself. 

124 In the initial moments my soul is always a little frightened, but later it is filled with a strange 
peace and strength. 

125 +AII these things could still be endured. But when the Lord demanded that I should paint 
that picture, they began to speak openly about me and to regard me as a hysteric and a 
fantasist, and the rumors began to grow louder. One of the sisters came to talk to me in 
private. She began by pitying me and said, "I've heard them say that you are a fantasist, 
Sister, and that you've been having visions. My poor Sister, defend yourself in this matter." 
She was a sincere soul, and she told me sincerely what she had heard. But I had to listen to 
such things every day. God only knows how tiring it was. 

126 Yet, I resolved to bear everything in silence and to give no explanations when I was 
questioned. Some were irritated by my silence, especially those who were more curious. 
Others, who reflected more deeply, said, "Sister Faustina must be very close to God if she 
has the strength to bear so much suffering." It was as if I were facing two groups of judges. I 
strove after interior and exterior silence. I said nothing about myself, even though I was 
questioned directly by some sisters. My lips were sealed. I suffered like a dove, without 
complaint. But some sisters seemed to find pleasure in vexing me in whatever way they 
could. My patience irritated them. But God gave me so much inner strength that I endured it 
calmly. 

127 + I learned that I would have help from no one at such moments, and I started to pray and 
beg the Lord for a confessor. My only desire was that some priest would say this one word to 
me, "Be at peace, you are on the right road," or "Reject all this for it does not come from 
God." But I could not find such a priest who was sufficiently sure of himself to give me a 
definite opinion in the name of the Lord. And so the uncertainty continued. 0 Jesus, if it is 
Your will that I live in such uncertainty, may Your Name be blessed! I beg You, Lord, direct 
my soul yourself and be with me, for of myself I am nothing. 



128 Thus I have already been judged from all sides. There is no longer anything in me that has 
escaped the sisters' judgment. But it seems now to have worn itself out, and they have 
begun to leave me in peace. My tormented soul has had some rest, and I have learned that 
the Lord has been closest to me in times of such persecutions. This [truce] lasted for only a 
short time. A violent storm broke out again. And now the old suspicions became, for them, as 
if true facts, and once again I had to listen to the same old songs. The Lord would have it 
that way. But then, strangely enough, even exteriorly I began to experience various failures. 
This brought down on me many sufferings of all sorts, known to God alone. 

But I tried as best I could to do everything with the purest of intentions. I could now see that 
everywhere I was being watched like a thief: in the chapel; while I was carrying out my 
duties; in my cell.[4oi I was now aware that, besides the presence of God, I had always close 
to me a human presence as well. And I must say that, more