 than once, this human presence 
bothered me greatly. There were times when I wondered whether I should undress to wash 
myself or not. Indeed, even that poor bed of mine was checked many times. [4ii More than 
once 1 was seized with laughter when I learned they would not even leave my bed alone. 

One of the sisters herself told me that she came to observe me in my cell every evening to 
see how I behave in it. 

Still, superiors are always superiors. And although they humiliated me personally and, on 
occasions, filled me with all kinds of doubts, they always allowed me to do what the Lord 
demanded. Though not in the way I asked, but in some other way, they fulfilled the Lord's 
demands and gave me permission for all the rigors and mortifications [He asked of me]. 

One day, one of the Mothers [probably Mother J ane] poured out so much of her anger on me 
and humiliated me so much that I thought I would not be able to endure it. She said to me,

"You queer, hysterical visionary, get out of this room; go on with you, Sister! "She continued 
to pour out upon my head everything she could think of. When I got to my cell, I fell on my 
face before the cross, and then looked at J esus; but I could no longer say a single word. Yet I 
concealed everything from the others and pretended that nothing had happened between us. 

129 Satan always takes advantage of such moments; thoughts of discouragement began to rise 
to the surface- for your faithfulness and sincerity-this is your reward. How can one be sincere 
when one is so misunderstood? J esus, J esus, I cannot go on any longer. Again I fell to the 
ground under this weight, and I broke out in a sweat, and fear began to overcome me. I had 
no one to lean on interiorly. Suddenly I heard a voice within my soul, Do not fear; I am 
with you. And an unusual light illumined my mind, and I understood that I should not give 
in to such sorrows. I was filled with a certain strength and left my cell with new courage to 
suffer. 

130 Nevertheless, I began to grow a bit negligent. I did not pay attention to these interior 
inspirations and tried to distract myself. But despite the noise and the distraction, I could see 
what was going on in my soul. The word of God is clear, and nothing can stifle it. I began to 
avoid encounters with the Lord in my soul because I did not want to fall prey to illusions. 
However, in a sense, the Lord kept pursuing me with His gifts; and truly I experienced, 
alternately, torture and joy. I make no mention here of the various visions and graces God 
granted me during this time, because I've written this down elsewhere. [42i 


131 But I will simply mention here that these various sufferings had come to a peak, and I 
resolved to put an end to these doubts of mine before my perpetual vows. Throughout my 
probation, I prayed for light for the priest to whom I was to open up my soul to its depths. I 
asked God that He himself would help me and grant me the grace to be able to express even 
the most secret things that exist between me and Him and to be so disposed that, whatever 
the priest would decide, I would accept as coming from Jesus himself. No matter what 
judgment he would pass on me, all I wanted was the truth and a decisive answer to certain 
questions. I put myself completely in God's hands, and [all] my soul desired was the truth. I 
could not go on living in doubt any longer although, in the depths of my soul, I was so very 
sure that these things came from God, that I would lay down my life for this. However, I 
placed the confessor's opinion above all, and I made up my mind to do as he thought best 
and to act according to the advice that he would give me. I looked forward to that moment 
which would decide the course of my actions for the rest of my life. I knew that everything 
would depend on this. It mattered little whether what he would say to me would be in accord 
with my inspirations or quite the contrary; this no longer mattered to me. I wanted to know 
the truth and follow it. 

Jesus, You can help me! From this moment, I have begun anew. I conceal all the graces 
within my soul and await whomsoever the Lord will send me. With no doubt in my heart, I 
asked the Lord himself to deign to help me during these moments, and a courage of sorts 
entered my soul. 

132 I must again mention that there are some confessors who seem to be true spiritual fathers, 
but only as long as things go well. When the soul finds itself in greater need, they become 
perplexed, and either cannot or will not understand the soul. They try to get rid of the person 
as soon as possible. But if the soul is humble, it will always profit in some little way or other. 
God himself will sometimes cast a shaft of light into the depths of the soul, because of its 
humility and faith. The confessor will sometimes say something he had never intended to 
say, without even realizing it himself. Oh, let the soul believe that such words are the words 
of the Lord himself! Though indeed we ought to believe that every word spoken in the 
confessional is God's, what I have referred to above is something that comes directly from 
God. And the soul perceives that the priest is not master of himself, that he is saying things 
that he would rather not say. This is how God rewards faith. 

I have experienced this many times myself. A certain very learned and respected priest

[probably Father Wilkowski, the sisters' confessor at Plock], to whom I sometimes happened 
to go to confession, was always severe and opposed to these matters [which I brought up to 
him]. But on one occasion he replied to me, "Bear in mind, Sister, that if God is asking this of 
you, you should not oppose Him. God sometimes wants to be praised in just this way. Be at 
peace; what God has started, He will finish. But I say this to you: faithfulness to God and 
humility. And once again: humility. Bear well in mind what I have told you today." I was 
delighted, and I thought that perhaps this priest had understood me. But it so turned out 
that I never went to confession to him again. 



133 +Once, one of the older Mothers [probably Mother J ane[43il summoned me, and it was as if 
fiery bolts from the blue were coming down upon my head, so much so that I could not even 
discover what it was all about. But after a while I understood that it was about a matter over 
which I had no control whatsoever. She said to me, "Get it out of your head, Sister, that the 
Lord Jesus might be communing in such an intimate way with such a miserable bundle of 
imperfections as you! Bear in mind that it is only with holy souls that the Lord Jesus 
communes in this way!" I acknowledged that she was right, because I am indeed a wretched 
person, but still I trust in God's mercy. When I met the Lord I humbled myself and said, 
"Jesus, it seems that You do not associate intimately with such wretched people as I" Be at 
peace. My daughter, it is precisely through such misery that I want to show the 
power of My mercy. I understood that this Mother had merely wanted to subject me to a 
[salutary] humiliation. 

134 + 0 my J esus, You have tested me so many times in this short life of mine! I have come to 
understand so many things, and even such that now amaze me. Oh, how good it is to 
abandon oneself totally to God and to give Him full freedom to act in one's soul! 

135 During the third probation, the Lord gave me to understand that I should offer myself to Him 
so that He could do with me as He pleased. I was to remain standing before Him as a victim 
offering. At first, I was quite frightened, as I felt myself to be so utterly miserable and knew 
very well that this was the case. I answered the Lord once again, "I am misery itself; how 

can I be a hostage [for others]? You do not understand this today. Tomorrow, during 
your adoration, I will make it known to you. My heart trembled, as did my soul, so 
deeply did these words sink into my soul. The word of God is living. 

When I came to the adoration, I felt within my soul that I had entered the temple of the 
living God, whose majesty is great and incomprehensible. And He made known to me what 
even the purest spirits are in His sight. Although I saw nothing externally, God's presence 
pervaded me. At that very moment my intellect was strangely illumined. A vision passed 
before the eyes of my soul; it was like the vision Jesus had in the Garden of Olives. First, the 
physical sufferings and all the circumstances that would increase them; [then] the full scope 
of the spiritual sufferings and those that no one would know about. Everything entered into 
the vision: false suspicions, loss of good name. I've summarized it here, but this knowledge 
was already so clear that what I went through later on was in no way different from what I 
had known at that moment. My name is to be: "sacrifice." 

When the vision ended, a cold sweat bathed my forehead. Jesus made it known to me that, 
even if I did not give my consent to this, I could still be saved; and He would not lessen His 
graces, but would still continue to have the same intimate relationship with me, so that even 
if I did not consent to make this sacrifice, God's generosity would not lessen thereby. 


136 And the Lord gave me to know that the whole mystery depended on me, on my free consent 
to the sacrifice given with full use of my faculties. In this free and conscious act lies the 
whole power and value before His Majesty. Even if none of these things for which I offered 
myself would ever happen to me, before the Lord everything was as though it had already 
been consummated. 

At that moment, I realized I was entering into communion with the incomprehensible 
Majesty. I felt that God was waiting for my word, for my consent. Then my spirit immersed

itself in the Lord, and I said, "Do with me as You please. I subject myself to Your will. As of 
today, Your holy will shall be my nourishment, and I will be faithful to Your commands with 
the help of Your grace. Do with me as You please. I beg You, 0 Lord, be with me at every 
moment of my life." 

137 Suddenly, when I had consented to the sacrifice with all my heart and all my will, God's 
presence pervaded me. My soul became immersed in God and was inundated with such 
happiness that I cannot put in writing even the smallest part of it. I felt that His Majesty was 
enveloping me. I was extraordinarily fused with God. I saw that God was well pleased with 
me and, reciprocally, my spirit drowned itself in Him. Aware of this union with God, I felt I 
was especially loved and, in turn, I loved with all my soul. A great mystery took place during 
that adoration, a mystery between the Lord and myself. It seemed to me that I would die of 
love [at the sight of] His glance. I spoke much with the Lord, without uttering a single word. 
And the Lord said to me, You are the delight of My Heart; from today on, every one of 
your acts, even the very smallest, will be a delight to My eyes, whatever you do. At 
that moment I felt transconsecrated. My earthly body was the same, but my soul was 
different; God was now living in it with the totality of His delight. This is not a feeling, but a 
conscious reality that nothing can obscure. 

138 A great mystery has been accomplished between God and me. Courage and strength have 
remained in my soul. When the time of adoration came to an end, I came out and calmly 
faced everything I had feared so much before. When I came out into the corridor, a great 
suffering and humiliation, at the hands of a certain person, was awaiting me. I accepted it 
with submission to a higher will and snuggled closely to the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus, 
letting Him know that I was ready for that for which I had offered myself. 

Suffering seemed to spring out of the ground. Even Mother Margaret herself was surprised. 
For others, many things passed unnoticed, for indeed it wasn't worth paying any attention to 
them; but in my case, nothing passed unnoticed; each word was analyzed, each step 
watched. One sister said to me, "Get ready, Sister, to receive a small cross at the hands of 
Mother Superior. I feel sorry for you." But as for me, I rejoiced at this in the depths of my 
soul and had been ready for it for a long time. When she saw my courage, she was surprised. 
I see now that a soul cannot do much of itself, but with God it can do all things. Behold what 
God's grace can do. Few are the souls that are always watchful for divine graces, and even 
fewer of such souls who follow those inspirations faithfully. 



139 Still, a soul which is faithful to God cannot confirm its own inspirations; it must submit them 
to the control of a very wise and learned priest; and until it is quite certain, it should remain 
distrustful. It should not, on its own initiative alone, put its trust in these inspirations and all 
other higher graces, because it can thus expose itself to great losses. 

Even though a soul may immediately distinguish between false inspirations and those of God, 
it should nevertheless be careful, because many things are uncertain. God is pleased and 
rejoices when a soul distrusts Him for His own sake; because it loves Him, it is prudent and 
itself asks and searches for help to make certain that it is really God who is acting within it. 
And once a well-instructed confessor has confirmed this, the soul should be at peace and 
give itself up to God, according to His directions; that is, according to the directions of the 
confessor. 

140 Pure love is capable of great deeds, and it is not broken by difficulty or adversity. As it 
remains strong in the midst of great difficulties, so too it perseveres in the toilsome and drab 
life of each day. It knows that only one thing is needed to please God: to do even the 
smallest things out of great love- love, and always love. 

Pure love never errs. Its light is strangely plentiful. It will not do anything that might 
displease God. It is ingenious at doing what is more pleasing to God, and no one will equal it. 
It is happy when it can empty itself and burn like a pure offering. The more it gives of itself, 
the happier it is. But also, no one can sense dangers from afar as can love; it knows how to

unmask and also knows with whom it has to deal. 

141 +But my torments are coming to an end. The Lord is giving me the promised help. I can see 
it in two priests; namely, Father Andrasz and Father Sopocko. During the retreat before my 
perpetual vows, lm; I was set completely at peace for the first time [by Father Andrasz[45i1, 
and afterwards I was led in the same direction by Father Sopocko. This was the fulfilment of 
the Lord's promise. 

142 When I was set at peace and taught how to follow God's paths, my spirit rejoiced in the Lord, 
and it seemed to me that I was running, not walking. My wings were spread for flight; I 
soared into the very heat of the sun, and I will not descend until I rest in Him, in whom my 
soul has lost itself forever. And I subjected myself totally to the action of grace. God stoops 
very low to my soul. I do not draw back, nor do I resist Him, but I lose myself in Him as my 
only treasure. I am one with the Lord. It is as if the gulf between us, Creator and creature, 
disappears. For a few days, my soul was in a state of continuous ecstasy. God's presence did 
not leave me for a single moment. And my soul remained in a continuous loving union with 
the Lord. But this in no way interfered with the performance of my duties. I felt I was 
transformed into love; I was all afire, but without being burned up. I lost myself in God 
unceasingly; God drew me to himself so strongly and powerfully that sometimes I was not 
aware of being on earth. I had impeded and feared God's grace for so long, and now God 
himself, through Father Andrasz, has removed all difficulties. My spirit has been turned 
towards the Sun and has blossomed in His rays for Him alone; I understand no more... [The 
sentence breaks off here and begins a completely new thought in the next line.] 


143 +1 have wasted many of God's graces because I was always afraid of being deluded. God 
drew me to himself so powerfully that often it was not in my power to resist his grace when I 
was suddenly immersed in him. At these moments, Jesus filled me with such great peace 
that, later on, even when I tried to become uneasy, I could not do so. And then, I heard 
these words in my soul: I n order that you may be assured that it is I who am 
demanding all these things of you, I will give you such profound peace that even if 
you wanted to feel troubled and frightened, it would not be in your power to do so 
today, but love will flood your soul to the point of self-oblivion. 

144 Later Jesus gave me another priest [Father Sopocko], before whom He ordered me to reveal 
my soul. At first I did so with a bit of hesitation, but a severe reprimand from Jesus brought 
about a deep humility within my soul. Under his direction, my soul made quick progress in 
the love of God, and many wishes of the Lord were carried out externa I ly.[46i Many a time 
have I been astounded at his courage and his profound humility. 

145 Oh, how wretched my soul is for having wasted so many graces! I was running away from 
God, and He pursued me with his graces. I most often experienced God's graces when I least 
expected them. From the moment He gave me a spiritual director, I have been more faithful 
to grace. Thanks to the director and his watchfulness over my soul, I have learned what 
guidance means and how J esus looks at it. J esus warned me of the least fault and stressed 
that He himself judges the matter that I present to my confessor; and [He told me] that ... 
any transgressions against the confessor touch Me myself. 

When under his direction my soul began to experience deep recollection and peace, I often 
heard these words in my soul: Strengthen yourself for combat - repeated over and over 
at various times. 

+Jesus often makes known to me what He does not like in my soul, and He has more than 
once rebuked me for what seemed to be trifles, but which were, in fact, things of great 
importance. He has warned me and tried me like a Master. For many years He himself 
educated me, until the moment when He gave me a spiritual director. Previously, He himself 
had made clear to me what I did not understand; but now, He tells me to ask my confessor 
about everything and often says, I will answer you through his mouth. Be at peace. It 
has never happened to me that I have received an answer which was contrary to what the 
Lord wanted of me, when I presented it to the spiritual director [Father Sopocko]. It

sometimes happens that Jesus first asks certain things of me, about which no one knows 
anything, and then, when I kneel at the confessional, my confessor gives me the same order- 
however, this is infrequent. 

+When, over a long period of time, a soul has received much light and many inspirations, 
and when the confessors have confirmed the source of these inspirations and set the soul at 
peace; if its love is great, Jesus now makes it known that it is time to put into action what it 
has received. The soul recognizes that God is counting on it, and this knowledge fortifies it. It 
knows that to be faithful it will often have to face various difficulties, but it trusts in God and, 
thanks to this trust, it reaches that point to which God is calling it. Difficulties do not terrify 
it; they are its daily bread, as it were. They do not frighten or terrify the soul, just as a 
warrior who is constantly in battle is not terrified by the roar of the cannon. Far from being 
frightened, it listens to determine from which side the enemy is launching his attack, in order 
to defeat him. It does nothing blindly, but examines and ponders everything deeply and, not 
counting on itself, it prays fervently and asks advice of other warriors who are experienced 
and wise. When the soul acts in this way, it nearly always wins. 


There are attacks when a soul has no time to think or seek advice; then it must enter into a 
life-or-death struggle. Sometimes it is good to flee for cover in the wound of the Heart of 
Jesus, without answering a single word. By this very act the enemy is already defeated. 

In time of peace, as well, the soul continues making efforts, just as in time of battle. It must 
exercise itself, and do so with energy; otherwise it has no chance of attaining victory. I 
regard the time of peace as a time of preparation for victory. The soul must be ever 
watchful; watchfulness and again, watchfulness. The soul that reflects receives much light. A 
distracted soul runs the risk of a fall, and let it not be surprised when it does fall. 0 Spirit of 
God, Director of the soul, wise is he whom You have trained! But for the Spirit of God to act 
in the soul, peace and recollection are needed. 

146 Prayer. -A soul arms itself by prayer for all kinds of combat. In whatever state the soul may 
be, it ought to pray. A soul which is pure and beautiful must pray, or else it will lose its 
beauty; a soul which is striving after this purity must pray, or else it will never attain it; a 
soul which is newly converted must pray, or else it will fall again; a sinful soul, plunged in 
sins, must pray so that it might rise again. There is no soul which is not bound to pray, for 
every single grace comes to the soul through prayer. 

147 I recall that I have received most light during adoration which I made lying prostrate before 
the Blessed Sacrament for half an hour every day throughout Lent. During that time I came 
to know myself and God more profoundly. And yet, even though I had the superiors' 
permission to do so, I encountered many obstacles to praying in such a way. Let the soul be 
aware that, in order to pray and persevere in prayer, one must arm oneself with patience 
and cope bravely with exterior and interior difficulties. The interior difficulties are 
discouragement, dryness, heaviness of spirit and temptations. The exterior difficulties are 
human respect and time; one must observe the time set apart for prayer. This has been my 
personal experience because, when I did not pray at the time assigned for prayer, later on I 
could not do it because of my duties; or if I did manage to do so, this was only with great 
difficulty, because my thoughts kept wandering off to my duties. I also experienced this 
difficulty: when a soul has prayed well and left prayer in a state of profound interior 
recollection, others resist its recollection; and so, the soul must be patient to persevere in 
prayer. It often happened to me that when my soul was more deeply immersed in God, and I 
had derived greater fruit from prayer, and God's presence accompanied me during the day, 
and at work there was more recollection and greater precision and effort at my duty, this was 
precisely when I received the most rebukes for being negligent in my duty and indifferent to 
everything; because less recollected souls want others to be like them, for they are a 
constant [source of] remorse to them.

148 +A noble and delicate soul, even the most simple, but one of delicate sensibilities, sees God 
in everything, finds Him everywhere, and knows how to find Him in even the most hidden 
things. It finds all things important, it highly appreciates all things, it thanks God for all 
things, it draws profit for the soul from all things, and it gives all glory to God. It places its 
trust in God and is not confused when the time of ordeals comes. It knows that God is always 
the best of Fathers and makes little of human opinion. It follows faithfully the faintest breath 
of the Holy Spirit; it rejoices in this Spiritual Guest and holds onto Him like a child to its 
mother. Where other souls come to a standstill and fear, this soul passes on without fear or 
difficulty. 



149 When the Lord himself wants to be close to a soul and to lead it, He will remove everything 
that is external. When I fell ill and was taken to the infirmary, I suffered much 
unpleasantness because of this. There were two of us sick in the infirmary. Sisters would 
come to see Sister N., but no one came to visit me. It is true that there was only one 
infirmary, but each one had her own cell. The winter nights were long, and Sister N. had the 
light and the radio headphones, while I could not even prepare my meditation for lack of a 
light. 

When nearly two weeks had passed in this way, I complained to the Lord one evening that I 
was suffering so much and that I could not even prepare my meditation because there was 
no light. And the Lord said that He would come every evening and give me the points for the 
next day's meditation. These points always concerned His sorrowful Passion. He would say, 
Consider My sufferings before Pilate. And thus, point by point, I meditated upon His 
sorrowful Passion for one week. From that moment, a great joy entered my soul, and I no 
longer wanted either the visitors or the light; Jesus sufficed me for everything. The superiors 
were indeed very solicitous for the sick, but the Lord ordained that I should feel forsaken. 

This best of masters withdraws every created thing in order that He himself might act. Many 
a time, I have experienced such sufferings and persecutions that Mother M. [probably Mother 
Margaret] herself said to me, "Sister, along your path, sufferings just spring up out of the 
ground. I look upon you, Sister, as one crucified. But I can see that J esus has a hand in this. 
Be faithful to the Lord." 

150 +1 want to write down a dream that I had about Saint Therese of the Child J esus. I was still a 
novice at the time and was going through some difficulties which I did not know how to 
overcome. They were interior difficulties connected with exterior ones. I made novenas to 
various saints, but the situation grew more and more difficult. The sufferings it caused me 
were so great that I did not know how to go on living, but suddenly the thought occurred to 
me that I should pray to Saint Therese of the Child J esus. I started a novena to this Saint, 
because before entering the convent I had had a great devotion to her. Lately I had 
somewhat neglected this devotion, but in my need I began again to pray with great fervor. 

On the fifth day of the novena, I dreamed of Saint Therese, but it was as if she were still 
living on earth. She hid from me the fact that she was a saint and began to comfort me, 
saying that I should not be worried about this matter, but should trust more in God. She 
said, "I suffered greatly, too," but I did not quite believe her and said, "It seems to me that 
you have not suffered at all." But Saint Therese answered me in a convincing manner that 
she had suffered very much indeed and said to me, "Sister, know that in three days the 
difficulty will come to a happy conclusion." When I was not very willing to believe her, she 
revealed to me that she was a saint. At that moment, a great joy filled my soul, and I said to 
her, "You are a saint?" "Yes," she answered, "I am a saint. Trust that this matter will be 
resolved in three days:" And I said, "Dear sweet Therese, tell me, shall I go to heaven?" And 
she answered, "Yes, you will go to heaven, Sister." "And will I be a saint?" To which she 
replied, "Yes, you will be a saint." "But, little Therese, shall I be a saint as you are, raised to 
the altar?" And she answered, "Yes, you will be a saint just as I am, but you must trust in

the Lord J esus." I then asked her if my mother and father would go to heaven, will 
[unfinished sentence] And she replied that they would. I further asked, "And will my brothers 
and sisters go to heaven?" She told me to pray hard for them, but gave me no definite 
answer. I understood that they were in need of much prayer. 

This was a dream. And as the proverb goes, dreams are phantoms; God is faith. 

Nevertheless, three days later the difficulty was solved very easily, just as she had said. And 
everything in this affair turned out exactly as she said it would. It was a dream, but it had its 



significance. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451 -500 t 501-521 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1 151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-1321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804- 1 828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 


Notebook 1 


151 +Once, when I was in the kitchen with Sister N..[47i she got a little upset with me and, as a 
punishment, ordered me to sit on the table while she herself continued to work hard, 
cleaning and scrubbing. And while I was sitting there, the sisters came along and were 
astounded to find me sitting on the table, and each one had her say. One said that I was a 
loafer and another, "What an eccentric!" I was a postulant at the time. Others said, "What 
kind of a sister will she make?" Still, I could not get down because sister had ordered me to 
sit there by virtue of obediencef48i until she told me to get down. Truly, God alone knows 
how many acts of self-denial it took. I thought I'd die of shame. God often allowed such 
things for the sake of my inner formation, but He compensated me for this humiliation by a 
great consolation. During Benediction I saw Him in great beauty. Jesus looked at me kindly 
and said, My daughter, do not be afraid of sufferings; I am with you. 

152 Once, I had night duty, £491 and I was suffering greatly in spirit because of the painting of the 
image, and I no longer knew which way to turn because they were constantly trying to 
convince me that the whole thing was an illusion. On the other hand, one priest said that 
perhaps God wanted to be worshiped through this image and therefore I ought to try to get it 
painted. Meanwhile, my soul was becoming extremely exhausted. When I entered the little 
chapel, I brought my head close to the tabernacle, knocked and said, "Jesus, look at the 
great difficulties I am having because of the painting of this image." And I heard a voice from 
the tabernacle, My daughter, your sufferings will not last much longer. 

153 One day, I saw two roads. One was broad, covered with sand and flowers, full of joy, music 
and all sorts of pleasures. People walked along it, dancing and enjoying themselves. They 
reached the end without realizing it. And at the end of the road there was a horrible 
precipice; that is, the abyss of hell. The souls fell blindly into it; as they walked, so they fell. 
And their number was so great that it was impossible to count them. And I saw the other 
road, or rather, a path, for it was narrow and strewn with thorns and rocks; and the people 
who walked along it had tears in their eyes, and all kinds of suffering befell them. Some fell 
down upon the rocks, but stood up immediately and went on. At the end of the road there 
was a magnificent garden filled with all sorts of happiness, and all these souls entered there. 
At the very first instant they forgot all their sufferings. 


154 Once, when there was adoration at the convent of the Sisters of the Holy Family, [ 501 1 went 
there in the evening with one of our sisters. As soon as I entered the chapel, the presence of 
God filled my soul. I prayed as I do at certain times, without saying a word. Suddenly, I saw 
the Lord, who said to me, Know that if you neglect the matter of the painting of the

image and the whole work of mercy, you will have to answer for a multitude of 
souls on the day of judgment. After these words of Our Lord, a certain fear filled my soul, 
and alarm took hold of me. Try as 1 would, 1 could not calm myself. These words kept 
resounding in my ears: So, 1 will not only have to answer for myself on the day of judgment, 
but also for the souls of others. These words cut deep into my heart. When I returned home, 

I went to the little J esus,L5ii fell on my face before the Blessed Sacrament and said to the 
Lord, "I will do everything in my power, but I beg You to be always with me and to give me 
strength to do Your holy will; for You can do everything, while I can do nothing of myself." 

155 +lt has happened to me for some time now that 1 immediately sense in my soul when 
someone is praying for me; and I likewise sense it in my soul when some soul asks me for 
prayer, even though they do not speak to me about it. The feeling is one of certain disquiet, 
as if someone were calling me; and when I pray 1 obtain peace. 

156 +Once, I desired very much to receive Holy Communion, but I had a certain doubt, and I did 
not go. I suffered greatly because of this. It seemed to me that my heart would burst from 
the pain. When I set about my work, my heart full of bitterness, Jesus suddenly stood by me 
and said, My daughter, do not omit Holy Communion unless you know well that your 
fall was serious; apart from this, no doubt must stop you from uniting yourself with 
Me in the mystery of My love. Your minor faults will disappear in My love like a 
piece of straw thrown into a great furnace. Know that you grieve Me much when 
you fail to receive Me in Holy Communion. 

157 +ln the evening, when I entered the small chapel, I heard these words in my soul: My 
daughter, consider these words: "And being in agony, he prayed more earnestly." 

When I started to think about them more deeply, much light streamed into my soul. I 
learned how much we need perseverance in prayer and that our salvation often depends on 
such difficult prayer. 

158 +When I was at Kiekrz [1930] to replace one of the sisters[52i for a short time, I went across 
the garden one afternoon and stopped on the shore of the lake; I stood there for a long time, 
contemplating my surroundings. Suddenly, I saw the Lord Jesus near me, and He graciously 
said to me, All this I created for you. My spouse; and know that all this beauty is 
nothing compared to what I have prepared for you in eternity. My soul was inundated 
with such consolation that I stayed there until evening, and it seemed to me like a brief 
moment. That was my free day, set apart for a one-day retreat, isn so I was quite free to 
devote myself to prayer. Oh, how the infinitely good God pursues us with His goodness! It 
often happens that the Lord grants me the greatest graces when I do not at all expect them. 


159 +0 Blessed Host, in golden chalice enclosed for me, 

That through the vast wilderness of exile 

I may pass-pure, immaculate, undefiled; 

Oh, grant that through the power of Your love this might come to be. 

0 Blessed Host, take up Your dwelling within my soul, 

0 Thou my heart's purest love! 

With Your brilliance the darkness dispel. 

Refuse not Your grace to a humble heart. 

0 Blessed Host, enchantment of all heaven, 

Though Your beauty be veiled 

And captured in a crumb of bread, 

Strong faith tears away that veil. 

160 +The crusade day,[54i which is the fifth of the month, happened to fall on the First Friday of 
the month. This was my day for keeping watch before the Lord J esus. It was my duty to 
make amends to the Lord for all offenses and acts of disrespect and to pray that, on this day, 
no sacrilege be committed. This day, my spirit was set aflame with special love for the 
Eucharist. It seemed to me that I was transformed into a blazing fire. When I was about to 
receive Holy Communion, a second Host fell onto the priest's sleeve, and I did not know 
which host I was to receive. After I had hesitated for a moment, the priest made an 
impatient gesture with his hand to tell me I should receive the Host. When I took the Host he 
gave me, the other one fell onto my hands. The priest went along the altar rail to distribute 
Communion, and I held the Lord Jesus in my hands all that time. When the priest 
approached me again, I raised the Host for him to put it back into the chalice, because when

1 had first received J esus I could not speak before consuming the Host, and so could not tell 
him that the other had fallen. But while I was holding the Host in my hand, I felt such a 
power of love that for the rest of the day I could neither eat nor come to my senses. I heard 
these words from the Host: I desired to rest in your hands, not only in your heart. And 
at that moment I saw the little J esus. But when the priest approached, I saw once again only 
the Host. 

161 Immaculate Virgin, 

Pure crystal for my heart, 

You are my strength, O sturdy anchor! 

You are the weak heart's shield and protection. 

Mary you are pure, of purity incomparable; 

At once both Virgin and Mother, 

You are beautiful as the sun, without blemish, 

And your soul is beyond all comparison. 

Your beauty has delighted the eye of the Thrice-Holy One. 

He descended from heaven, leaving His eternal throne, 

And took Body and Blood of your heart 

And for nine months lay hidden in a Virgin's Heart. 

0 Mother, Virgin, purest of all lilies, 

Your heart was J esus' first tabernacle on earth. 

Only because no humility was deeper than yours 

Were you raised above the choirs of Angels and above all Saints. 


0 Mary, my sweet Mother, 

1 give you my soul, my body and my poor heart. 

Be the guardian of my life, 

Especially at the hour of death, in the final strife. 

162 J .M.J . J esus, I trust in You. J anuary 1, 1937 Chart of internal control of the soul. Particular 
examen-to be united with the merciful Christ. Practice: inner silence, strict observance of 
silence. 

The Conscience 

January: God and the soul; silence. Victories 41, falls 4. 

Exclamatory Prayer: But Jesus remained silent. 

February: God and the soul; silence. Victories 36, falls 3. 

Exclamatory Prayer: Jesus, I trust in You. 

March: God and the soul; silence. Victories 51, falls 2. 

Exclamatory Prayer: Jesus, enkindle my heart with love. 

April: God and the soul; silence. Victories 61, falls 4. 

Exclamatory Prayer: With God, I can do all things. 

May: God and the soul; silence. Victories 92, falls 3. 

Exclamatory Prayer: In His Name is my strength. 

June: God and the soul; silence. Victories 64, falls 1. 

Exclamatory Prayer: All for Jesus. 

July: God and the soul; silence. Victories 62, falls 8. 

Exclamatory Prayer: Jesus, rest in my heart. 

August: God and the soul; silence. Victories 88, falls 7. 

Exclamatory Prayer: Jesus, You know... 

September: God and the soul; silence. Victories 99, falls 1. 

Exclamatory Prayer: Jesus, hide me in Your Heart. 

October: God and the soul; silence. Victories 41, falls 3. 

Exclamatory Prayer: Mary, unite me with Jesus. 

November: God and the soul; silence. Victories, falls. 

Exclamatory Prayer: 0 my Jesus, have mercy! 

December: God and the soul; silence. Victories, falls. 

Exclamatory Prayer: Hail, living Host! 



163 JMJ The Year 1937 
General Exercises 

+0 Most Holy Trinity! As many times as I breathe, as many times as my heart beats, as 
many times as my blood pulsates through my body, so many thousand times do I want to 
glorify Your mercy. 

+ 1 want to be completely transformed into Your mercy and to be Your living reflection, 0 
Lord. May the greatest of all divine attributes, that of Your unfathomable mercy, pass 
through my heart and soul to my neighbor. 

Help me, 0 Lord, that my eyes may be merciful, so that I may never suspect or judge from 
appearances, but look for what is beautiful in my neighbors' souls and come to their rescue. 

Help me, that my ears may be merciful, so that I may give heed to my neighbors' needs and 
not be indifferent to their pains and moanings. Help me, 0 Lord, that my tongue may be 
merciful, so that I should never speak negatively of my neighbor, but have a word of comfort 
and forgiveness for all. 

Help me, 0 Lord, that my hands may be merciful and filled with good deeds, so that I may 
do only good to my neighbors and take upon myself the more difficult and toilsome tasks. 

Help me, that my feet may be merciful, so that I may hurry to assist my neighbor, 
overcoming my own fatigue and weariness. My true rest is in the service of my neighbor. 

Help me, 0 Lord, that my heart may be merciful so that I myself may feel all the sufferings 
of my neighbor. I will refuse my heart to no one. I will be sincere even with those who, I 
know, will abuse my kindness. And I will lock myself up in the most merciful Heart of Jesus. I

will bear my own suffering in silence. May Your mercy, 0 Lord, rest upon me. 

+You yourself command me to exercise the three degrees of mercy. The first: the act of 
mercy, of whatever kind. The second: the word of mercy-if I cannot carry out a work of 
mercy, I will assist by my words. The third: prayer-if I cannot show mercy by deeds or 
words, I can always do so by prayer. My prayer reaches out even there where I cannot reach 
out physically. 

0 my Jesus, transform me into Yourself, for you can do all things. 

[four pages left blank! rssi 

164 +JMJ Warsaw, 1933. 

Probation Before Perpetual Vowsf56i 

When I learned I was to go for probation, my heart beat with joy at the thought of such an 
immense grace, that of the perpetual vows. I went before the Blessed Sacrament; and when 

1 immersed myself in a prayer of thanksgiving, I heard these words in my soul: My child 
you are My delight, you are the comfort of My Heart. I grant you as many graces as 
you can hold. As often as you want to make Me happy, speak to the world about My 
great and unfathomable mercy. 


165 A few weeks before I was told about the probation, I entered the chapel for a moment and 
Jesus said to me, At this very moment the superiors are deciding which sisters are 
going to take perpetual vows. Not all of them will be granted this grace, but this is 
their own fault. He who does not take advantage of small graces will not receive 
great ones. But to you, my child, this grace is being given. My soul was seized with 
joyful surprise, because a few days earlier one of the sisters had said to me, "Sister, you will 
not be going for the third probation. I myself will see to it that you will not be permitted to 
make your vows." I said nothing to the sister, but felt great pain which I tried to conceal as 
best I could. 

0 Jesus, how strange are Your ways! I now see that people can do very little on their own, 
for I did make my probation, as Jesus had told me. 

166 In prayer I always find light and strength of spirit, although there are moments so trying and 
hurtful, that it is sometimes difficult to imagine that these things can happen in a convent. 
Strangely, God sometimes allows them, but always in order to manifest or develop virtue in a 
soul. That is the reason for trials. 

167 Today [November, 1932], I arrived in Warsaw for the third probation. After a cordial meeting 
with the dear Mothers, I went into the small chapel for a moment. Suddenly God's presence 
filled my soul, and I heard these words, My daughter, I desire that your heart be 
formed after the model of My merciful Heart. You must be completely imbued with 
My mercy. 

Dear Mother Directress [Margaret] 

at once asked me whether I had had a retreat that year, and I said no. "Then you must first 
have a retreat of at least three days." Thanks be to God there was at Walendowsf57i an eight- 
day retreat in which I could take part. But difficulties arose in regard to my leaving for this 
retreat. A certain person opposed my going very much, and it already [appeared that] I was 
not to go. After dinner, I went into the chapel for a five-minute adoration. Suddenly I saw 
the Lord Jesus, who said to me, My daughter, I am preparing many graces for you, 
which you will receive during this retreat which you will begin tomorrow. I 
answered, "Jesus, the retreat has already begun, and I am not supposed to go." And He said 
to me, Get ready for it, because you will begin the retreat tomorrow. And as for your 
departure, I will arrange that with the superiors. And in an instant, Jesus disappeared. 

1 began to wonder how this was going to happen. But after a moment I rejected all such 
thoughts and devoted the time I had to prayer, begging the Holy Spirit for light to see the 
whole misery that I am. After a short while, I left the little chapel to go about my duties. 

Soon Mother General [Michael] called me and said, "Sister, you will go to Walendow today 
with Mother Valeria so that you can start the retreat tomorrow. Fortunately, Mother Valeria 
happens to be here and you can go together." Within two hours I was already in Walendow. I 
reflected for a moment within myself and recognized that only J esus can arrange things in 
such a way. 

168 When the person who so strongly opposed my participation in the retreat saw me, she 
showed surprise and dissatisfaction. Paying no heed to this, I greeted her affectionately and

went to visit the Lord, in order to learn how I should conduct myself during the retreat. 


169 My conversation with the Lord Jesus before the retreat. Jesus told me that this retreat would 
be a little different from others. You shall strive to maintain a profound peace in 
respect to your communings with Me. I will remove all doubts in this regard. I 
know that you are at peace now as I speak to you, but the moment I stop talking 
you will start looking for doubts. But I want you to know that I will affirm your soul 
to such a degree that even if you wanted to be troubled, it will not be within your 
power. And as a proof that it is I who am speaking to you, you will go to confession 
on the second day of the retreat to the priest who is preaching the retreat; you will 
go to him as soon as he has finished his conference and will present to him all your 
doubts concerning Me. I will answer you through his lips, and then your fears will 
end. During this retreat, observe such strict silence that it will be as though nothing 
exists around you. You shall speak only to Me and to your confessor; you will ask 
your superiors only for penances. I felt immense joy that the Lord would show me such 
kindness and lower himself so much for my sake. 

170 The first day of the retreat. I tried to be the first in the chapel in the morning; before the 
meditation I had a bit of time for prayer to the Holy Spirit and to Our Lady. I earnestly 
begged the Mother of God to obtain for me the grace of fidelity to these inner inspirations 
and of faithfully carrying out God's will, whatever it might be. I began this retreat with a very 
special kind of courage. 

171 Struggle to keep silence. As usual, sisters from various houses came to the retreat. One of 
the sisters whom I had not seen for a long time, came to my cell and said she had something 
to tell me. I did not answer her, and she saw that I did not want to break silence. She said to 
me, "I didn't know you were such an eccentric, sister," and she went away. I was well aware 
that she had no other business with me than to satisfy her own curious self-love. O God, 
preserve me in faithfulness. 

172 The fathenssi who preached the retreat came from America. He had come to Poland for only 
a short time, and it so happened that he conducted our retreat. A deep interior life was 
reflected from his person. His bearing testified to the greatness of his spirit. Mortification and 
recollection characterized this priest. But despite these great virtues, I experienced much 
difficulty in revealing my soul to him in regard to graces received; as for sins, it is always 
easy to do so, but in respect to graces I really have to make a great effort, and even then I 
do not tell everything. 

173 Satan's temptations during meditation. I felt a strange fear that the priest would not 
understand me, or that he would have no time to hear everything I would have to say. How 
am I going to tell him all this? If it were Father Bukowski I could do it more easily, but this 

J esuit whom I am seeing for the first time... Then I remembered Father Bukowski's advice 
that I should at least take brief notes of the lights sent to me by God during the retreats and 
give him at least a brief report on them. My God, for a day and a half all has gone well, and 
now a life and death struggle is beginning. The conference is to start in a half hour, and then 
I am to go to confession. Satan tried to persuade me into believing that if my superiors have 
told me that my inner life is an illusion, why should I ask again and trouble the confessor? 
Didn't MX [probably Mother J ane] tell you that the Lord J esus does not commune with souls 
as miserable as yours? This confessor is going to tell you the same thing. Why speak to him 
about all this? These are not sins, and Mother X, told you that all this communing with the 
Lord Jesus was daydreaming and pure hysteria. So why tell it to this confessor? You would do 
better to dismiss all this as illusions. Look how many humiliations you have suffered because 
of them, and how many more are still awaiting you, and all the sisters know that you are a 


hysteric. "Jesus!" I called out with all the strength of my soul. 

174 At that moment the priest came in and began the conference. He spoke for a short time, as if 
he were in a hurry. After the conference, he went over to the confessional. Seeing that none

of the sisters were going there, I sprang from my kneeler, and in an instant was in the 
confessional. There was no time to deliberate. I nstead of telling the father about the doubts 
that had been sown in me in respect to my dealings with the Lord J esus, I began to speak 
about these temptations I have just described above. The confessor immediately understood 
my situation and said, "Sister, you distrust the Lord Jesus because He treats you so kindly. 
Well, Sister, be completely at peace. Jesus is your Master, and your communing with Him is 
neither daydreaming nor hysteria nor illusion. Know that you are on the right path. Please try 
to be faithful to these graces; you are not free to shun them. You do not need at all, Sister, 
to tell your superiors about these interior graces, unless the Lord J esus instructs you clearly 
to do so, and even then you should first consult with your confessor. But if the Lord J esus 
demands something external, in this case, after consulting your confessor, you should carry 
out what He asks of you, even if this costs you greatly. On the other hand, you must tell your 
confessor everything. There is absolutely no other course for you to take, Sister. Pray that 
you may find a spiritual director, or else you will waste these great gifts of God. I repeat 
once again, be at peace; you are following the right path. Take no heed of anything else, but 
always be faithful to the Lord J esus, no matter what anyone says about you. It is with just 
such miserable souls that the Lord Jesus communes in this intimate way. And the more you 
humble yourself, the more the Lord J esus will unite Himself with you." 175 176 177 

175 When I left the confessional, ineffable joy filled my soul, so that I withdrew to a secluded 
spot in the garden to hide myself from the sisters to allow my heart to pour itself out to God. 
God's presence penetrated me and, in an instant, all my nothingness was drowned in God; 
and at the same moment I felt, or rather discerned, the Three Divine Persons dwelling in me. 
And I had such great peace in my soul that I myself was surprised that I could have had so 
many misgivings. 

176 +Resolution : Faithfulness to inner inspirations, even though I would have no idea how much 
I would have to pay for it. I must do nothing on my own without first consulting the 
confessor. 

177 +Renewal