 protecting me from people's eyes. 

1056 At eleven o'clock Jesus said to me, My host, you are refreshment for My tormented 
Heart. I thought, after these words, that my heart would burn up. And He brought me into 
such close intimacy with Himself that my heart was espoused to His Heart in a loving union, 
and I could feel the faintest stir of His Heart and He, of mine. The fire of my created love 
was joined to the ardor of His eternal love. This one grace surpasses all others in its 
immensity. His Trinitarian Being enveloped me entirely, and I am totally immersed in Him. 
My littleness is, as it were, wrestling with this Immortal Mighty One. I am immersed in 
incomprehensible love and incomprehensible torture because of His Passion. All that 
concerns His Being is imparted to me also. 

1057 Up to now, Jesus has been bringing me to know about, and to have a presentiment of, this 
grace, but today He granted it to me. I would not even dare to dream about it. My heart is 
in ceaseless ecstasy, as it were, although outwardly nothing disturbs my contacts with my 
neighbor or my attending to various matters. Nothing is capable of interrupting my ecstasy, 
nor can anyone suspect it, because I have asked God to protect me from detection by 
people. And, together with this grace, there entered my soul a whole ocean of light, 
enabling me to understand God and myself. Amazement overwhelms me entirely and leads 
me as if into a new ecstasy [aroused by the fact] that God has deigned to descend to me, 
who am so little. 

1058 + At three o'clock, I prayed prostrate, in the form of a cross, for the whole world. Jesus' 
mortal life was coming to an end. I heard His seven words; then He looked at me and said, 

Beloved daughter of My Heart, you are My solace amidst terrible torments. 

1059 Jesus is commanding me to make a novena before the Feast of Mercy, and today I am to 
begin it for the conversion of the whole world and for the recognition of The Divine Mercy... 

so that every soul will praise My goodness. I desire trust from My creatures. 
Encourage souls to place great trust in My fathomless mercy. Let the weak, sinful 
soul have no fear to approach Me, for even if it had more sins than there are 
grains of sand in the world, all would be drowned in the unmeasurable depths of 
My mercy.

1060 When Jesus had given up His last breath, my soul dissolved from the pain, and for a long 
time I could not come to myself. I found some relief in tears. The One whom my heart had 
come to love has died. Will anyone understand my grief? 



1061 In the evening, over the radio, I heard hymns; that is, psalms, sung by priests, r iss I burst 
into tears, and all of the pain was renewed in my soul, and I wept sorrowfully, unable to 
find appeasement in this pain. Then I heard a voice in my soul: Do not cry; I am not 
suffering any more. And for the faithfulness with which you accompanied Me in My 
sufferings and death, your own death will be a solemn one, and I will accompany 
you in that last hour. Beloved pearl of My Heart, I see your love so pure, purer 
than that of the angels, and all the more so because you keep fighting. For your 
sake I bless the world. I see your efforts to please Me, and they delight My Heart. 

After these words, I wept no more, but thanked the heavenly Father for having sent us His 
Son and for the work of the Redemption of mankind. 

1062 + I made an hour of adoration in thanksgiving for the graces which had been granted me 
and for my illness. Illness also is a great grace. I have been ill for four months, but I do not 
recall having wasted so much as a minute of it. All has been for God and souls; I want to be 
faithful to Him everywhere. 

During this adoration, I realized the utter care and goodness that Jesus has been lavishing 
upon me and the protection He has given me against all evil. I thank You especially, Jesus, 
for visiting me in my solitude, and I thank You also for inspiring my superiors to send me 
for this treatment. Give them, J esus, the omnipotence of Your blessing and compensate 
them for all the losses incurred because of me. 

1063 Today, J esus is bidding me to comfort and reassure a certain soul who has opened herself 
to me and told me about her difficulties. This soul is pleasing to the Lord, but she is not 
aware of it. God is keeping her in deep humility. I have carried out the Lord's directives. 

1064 + 0 my most sweet Master, good Jesus, I give You my heart. You shape and mold it after 
Your liking. 0 fathomless love, I open the calyx of my heart to You, like a rosebud to the 
freshness of dew. To You alone, my Betrothed, is known the fragrance of the flower of my 
heart. Let the fragrance of my sacrifice be pleasing to You. 0 Immortal God, my everlasting 
delight, already here on earth You are my heaven. May every beat of my heart be a new 
hymn of praise to You, 0 Holy Trinity! Had I as many hearts as there are drops of water in 
the ocean or grains of sand in the whole world, I would offer them all to You, 0 my Love, 0 
Treasure of my heart! Whomever I shall meet in my life, no matter who they may be, I 
want to draw them all to love You, O my Jesus, my Beauty, my Repose, my sole Master, 
Judge, Savior and Spouse, all in one; I know that one title will modify the other-1 have 
entrusted everything to Your mercy. 

1065 + My Jesus, support me when difficult and stormy days come, days of testing, days of 
ordeal, when suffering and fatigue begin to oppress my body and my soul. Sustain me, 
Jesus, and give me strength to bear suffering. Set a guard upon my lips that they may 
address no word of complaint to creatures. Your most merciful Heart is all my hope. I have 
nothing for my defense but only Your mercy; in it lies all my trust. 

1066 March 27, 1937. Today, I returned from Pradnik, after nearly four months of treatment. For 
everything, I give great thanks to God. I have made use of every moment to glorify God. 
When I went into the chapel for a moment, I realized how much I would have to suffer and 
struggle, with regard to this whole matter. O Jesus, my strength, You alone can help me; 
grant me fortitude. 


1067 March 28. Resurrection. During the Mass of Resurrection, I saw the Lord in beauty and 
splendor, and He said to me, My daughter, peace be with you. He blessed me and 
disappeared, and my soul was filled with gladness and joy beyond words. My heart was 
fortified for struggle and sufferings. 

1068 Today, I had a conversation with Father [Andrasz] and he recommended great caution in 
the matter of these sudden appearances of the Lord Jesus. When he was speaking about 
divine mercy, some sort of strength and power entered my heart. My God, I want so much

to express everything and am so very unable to do so. Father tells me that the Lord J esus is 
very generous in communicating himself to souls and, on the other hand, He is, so to 
speak, stingy. "Although God's generosity is very great," said Father, "be careful anyway, 
because these sudden appearances arouse suspicion; although, personally, I do not see 
anything wrong here, or anything contrary to faith. Be a little more careful, and when 
Mother Superior comes, you can talk to her about these things." 

1069 March 29, 1937. During meditation today, I saw the Lord in great beauty, and He said to 
me, Peace be to you. My daughter. My whole soul trembled with love for Him and I said, 
"0 Lord, although I love You with all my heart, please do not appear to me, because my 
spiritual director has told me that these sudden appearances of Yours arouse the suspicion 
that You could be an illusion. And although I love You more than my own life, and I know 
that You are my Lord and God, who are communing with me, I must above all be obedient 
to my confessor." 

Jesus listened to my words with gravity and kindness and spoke these words to me: Tell 

your confessor that I commune with your soul in such an intimate manner 
because you do not steal My gifts, and this is why I pour all these graces upon 
your soul, because I know that you will not hoard them for yourself. But as a sign 
that his prudence is agreeable to Me, you shall not see Me, and I will not appear to 
you in this way until you have given him an account of what I have just said. 

1070 + April 2, 1937. In the morning, during Mass, I heard these words: Tell the superior that 
I want adoration to take place here for the intention of imploring mercy for the 
world. 

1071 O my Jesus, You alone know what my heart is going through. O my Strength, You can do all 
things, and though I expose myself to great sufferings, I shall always remain faithful to You 
because I am sustained by Your singular grace. 

1072 + April 3, 1937. Today, the Lord said to me, Tell the Reverend Professor [probably 
Father Theodore ri86i ] that I desire that on the Feast of My Mercy he deliver a 
sermon about My fathomless mercy. I fulfilled God's wish, but the priest did not want to 
acknowledge the Lord's message. When I left the confessional, I heard these words: Do as 

I tell you and be at peace; this matter is between him and Me. You will not be held 
responsible for this. 


1073 April 4, 1937. Low Sunday; that is, the Feast of Mercy. In the morning, after Holy 
Communion, my soul was immersed in the Godhead. I was united to the Three Divine 
Persons in such a way that when I was united to Jesus, I was simultaneously united to the 
Father and to the Holy Spirit. My soul was flooded with joy beyond understanding, and the 
Lord gave me to experience the whole ocean and abyss of His fathomless mercy. Oh, if only 
souls would want to understand how much God loves them! All comparisons, even if they 
were the most tender and the most vehement, are but a mere shadow when set against the 
reality. 

When I was united to the Lord, I came to know how many souls are glorifying God's mercy. 

1074 When I went for adoration, I heard these words: My beloved daughter, write down 
these words, that today My Heart has rested in this convent [the Cracow house]. Tell 
the world about My mercy and My love. 

The flames of mercy are burning me. I desire to pour them out upon human souls. 
Oh, what pain they cause Me when they do not want to accept them! 

My daughter, do whatever is within your power to spread devotion to My mercy. I 
will make up for what you lack. Tell aching mankind to snuggle close to My 
merciful Heart, and I will fill it -with peace. 

Tell [all people]. My daughter, that I am Love and Mercy itself. When a soul 
approaches Me with trust, I fill it with such an abundance of graces that it cannot 
contain them within itself, but radiates them to other souls. 

1075 Souls who spread the honor of My mercy I shield through their entire lives as a 
tender mother her infant, and at the hour of death I will not be a J udge for them, 
but the Merciful Savior. At that last hour, a soul has nothing with which to defend 
itself except My mercy. Happy is the soul that during its lifetime immersed itself in 
the Fountain of Mercy, because justice will have no hold on it. 

1076 Write this: Everything that exists is enclosed in the bowels of My mercy, more

deeply than an infant in its mother's womb. How painfully distrust of My goodness 
wounds Me! Sins of distrust wound Me most painfully. 

1077 During Holy Mass, the Directress of Novices [Sister Call ista ri 87 i ] played a beautiful hymn 
about the mercy of God. I then asked the Lord to give her a deeper knowledge of the abyss 
of this inconceivable mercy. 

1078 + When I was saying good night to the Lord before retiring, I heard the words, Host, dear 
to My Heart, for your sake I bless the earth. 

1079 April 7, 1937. Today, when a certain person entered the chapel, I felt a terrible pain in my 
hands, my feet and my side, just as Jesus did during His Passion. This lasted only for a brief 
moment. But in this way I recognized a soul who was not in God's grace. 

1080 On one occasion I saw the Holy Father reflecting about this matter [presumably the 
establishment of the Feast of The Divine Mercy]. 


1081 April 10, 1937. Today, Mother Superior gave me an article about The Divine Mercy to read, 
and with it there was also a reproduction of the image that had been painted. The article 
appeared in the Vilnius Weekly rissi and was sent to us in Cracow by Father Michael 
Sopocko, that zealous apostle of The Divine Mercy. In this article are included words that 
the Lord J esus has spoken to me, some of them quoted verbatim. 

1082 When I took the issue of the Weekly into my hands, an arrow of love pierced my soul. - For 

the sake of your ardent desires, I am hastening the Feast of Mercy. My spirit burst 
into such a powerful flame of love that it seemed to me that I was totally dissolved in God. 

1083 + That beautiful soul who is spreading this work of divine mercy throughout the world is, by 
his deep humility, very pleasing to God. 

1084 Before every major grace, my soul undergoes a test of patience, for I feel the grace, but do 
not yet possess it. My spirit burns with impatience, but the hour has not yet come. These 
moments are so very extraordinary that it is difficult to describe them. 

1085 April 13, 1937. Today I must stay in bed all day. I had a violent fit of coughing, which left 
me so weak that I have no strength to walk. My spirit is eager to do God's work, but 
physical strength has left me. I cannot penetrate Your actions at this moment, O Lord; 
therefore, I keep repeating with a loving act of the will: do with me as You please. 

1086 Although the temptations are strong, a whole wave of doubts beats against my soul, and 
discouragement stands by, ready to enter into the act, the Lord, however, strengthens my 
will, against which all the attempts of the enemy are shattered as if against a rock. I see 
how many actual graces God grants me; these support me ceaselessly. I am very weak, 
and I attribute everything solely to the grace of God. 

1087 + When one day I resolved to practice a certain virtue, I lapsed into the vice opposed to 
that virtue ten times more frequently than on other days. In the evening, I was reflecting 
on why, today, I had lapsed so extraordinarily, and I heard the words: You were counting 
too much on yourself and too little on Me. And I understood the cause of my lapses. 

1088 Sudden return of health. 

After I had written a letter to Father Sopocko on Sunday, April 11, I suddenly became so 
very ill that I did not send that letter, but waited for a clear sign of God's will. However, my 
health got so bad that I had to go to bed. The coughing racked me so much that it seemed 
to me that, if this repeats a few more times, it will surely be the end of me. 


1089 On April 14, I felt so bad that I barely managed to get up to assist at Holy Mass. I felt much 
worse than I did at the time they sent me for treatment. There was wheezing, and there 
were rattling noises in my lungs and strange pains. When I received Holy Communion, I 
don't know why, but it was as if something were urging me to this prayer, and I began to 
pray in this manner: "Jesus, may Your pure and healthy blood circulate in my ailing 
organism, and may Your pure and healthy body transform my weak body, and may a 
healthy and vigorous life throb within me, if it is truly Your holy will that I should set about 
the work in question; and this will be a clear sign of Your holy will for me." 

As I was praying in this way, I suddenly felt as if something were jolting my whole organism 
and, in an instant, I felt completely well. My breath is clear, as if there had never been

anything the matter with my lungs, and I feel no pain, and this is a sign for me that I 
should set about the work. 

1090 And this happened on the last day of my novena to the Holy Spirit. After this return to 
health, I found myself united with the Lord Jesus in a purely spiritual way. Jesus gave me 
strong assurances; that is, He confirmed me in respect to His demands. I remained close to 
the Lord J esus all that day and talked with Him about the details concerning that 
congregation. 

Jesus infused my soul with power and courage to act. Now I understand that if the Lord 
demands something of a soul, He gives it the means to carry it out, and through grace He 
makes it capable of doing this. So, even if the soul be utterly miserable, at the Lord's 
command it can undertake things beyond its expectation, because this is the sign by which 
it can be known that the Lord is with that soul: if God's power and strength, which make 
the soul courageous and valiant, is manifest within it. As for myself, I am always at first a 
bit frightened at the Lord's greatness, but afterwards my soul is filled with profound peace 
which nothing can disturb, as well as an inner strength to do what the Lord is demanding at 
that particular moment.... 

1091 Then I heard these words: Go tell the superior that you are in good health. 

I neither know, nor ask how long I will remain in good health. I only know that I am 
enjoying good health at present. The future does not belong to me. I asked for this health 
as evidence of God's will and not in order to seek relief from my suffering. 

1092 April 16, 1937. Today, as God's Majesty swept over me, my soul understood that the Lord, 
so very great though He is, delights in humble souls. The more a soul humbles itself, the 
greater the kindness with which the Lord approaches it. Uniting himself closely with it, He 
raises it to His very throne. Happy is the soul whom the Lord himself defends. I have come 
to know that only love is of any value; love is greatness; nothing, no works, can compare 
with a single act of pure love of God. 


1093 + O J esus, shield me with Your mercy and also judge me leniently, or else Your justice may 
rightly damn me. 



1094 April 17. Today, during a catechetical lecture [by Father Theodore Q89I ], I was given a 
confirmation of what I had understood interiorly and lived by for quite some time; namely, 
that if a soul loves God sincerely and is intimately united with Him, then, even though such 
it soul may be living in the midst of difficult external circumstances, nothing can disturb its 
interior life; and in the midst of corruption, it can remain pure and unsullied; because the 
great love of God gives it strength for battle, and God also protects in a special way, even in 
a miraculous way, a soul that loves Him sincerely. 

1095 When, one day, God gave me the inner knowledge that I had never lost my innocence, and 
that despite all dangers in which I had found myself, He himself had been guarding me so 
that the virginity of my soul and heart would remain intact, I spent the day in fervent 
interior thanksgiving. I thanked God that He had bee pleased to protect me from evil, and 
also for this: that I had found favor in His eyes, that He himself had given me assurance of 
this. 

1096 And a few years later, He deigned to confirm me in this grace, and since that time I have 
not experienced the rebellion of the senses against the soul. I have written this down in 
greater detail elsewhere in my diary [cf. paragraph no. 40]. As often as I recall this 
inconceivable grace, a fresh flame of love and gratitude to God bursts forth from my heart; 
and this same love leads me to complete forgetfulness of self. 

1097 Since that time, I have been living under the virginal ', cloak of the Mother of God. She has 
been guarding me and instructing me. I am quite at peace, close to Her Immaculate Heart. 
Because I am so weak and inexperienced, I nestle like a little child close to Her heart. 

1098 Although God has confirmed me in this virtue, I am, however, constantly on the watch and 
fear even my own shadow, but this only because I have come to love God intensely. 

1099 This grace from God was given to me precisely because I was the weakest of all people; this 
is why the Almighty has surrounded me with His special mercy. 

1100 April 24. I can sense every major grace in advance; a strange longing and desire for God

comes over me, and then I wait for the grace. And the greater the grace, the more distinct 
is the presentiment, and the fiercer is my struggle with the adversary of my salvation. 

My soul is sometimes in such a condition that I can only describe it by means of a 
comparison: there are two great friends, and one of them is giving a great feast and has 
invited the other; both of them are looking forward to it; but the hour of the feast has been 
set. Well, the moments just before receiving the grace are so violent that it is difficult to 
describe them. They are marked by painful longing and the fire of love. I can feel the Lord 
is there, but I cannot be completely absorbed in Him, because the hour has been 
designated. Often, before such a moment of grace, I am utterly destitute in mind, will and 
heart. I am left all alone, and I wait for the One God. He himself effects this in me before 
His coming. April 23, 1937. I have begun a three-day retreat today. ri9oi 


Notebook I: 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 


301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-521 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1001-1050 t 1051-1 100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231- 132 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401-1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 3 


1101 In the evening, I heard these words in my soul: My daughter, know that I shall speak 
to you in a special way through this priest [Father Plaza r 1911 1 so that you may not 
yield to doubt concerning My wishes. Already in the first meditation my soul was struck 
by the following words of the priest: I must not oppose God's will and God's designs, 
whatever they might be; and as soon as 1 am convinced of the certitude and the 
authenticity of the will of God, I have the duty of carrying it out. No one can release me 
from this. Whatever the will of God may be, once I have come to know it, I ought to carry it 
out. This is just a very short summary, but the whole meditation imprinted itself on my 
soul, and I have no doubts about anything. I know what God wants of me, and what I ought 
to do. 

1102 There are, in my life, times and moments of spiritual insight; that is, divine illuminations, 
when the soul receives inward instruction about things it has not read in any book and has 
not been taught by any person. These are times of great inner knowledge which God 
himself imparts to the soul. These are great mysteries.... I often receive light and the 
knowledge of the interior life of God and of God's intimate disposition, and this fills me with 
unutterable trust and a joy that I cannot contain within myself; I desire to dissolve 
completely in Him.... 

1103 + The quintessence of love is sacrifice and suffering. Truth wears a crown of thorns. Prayer 
involves the intellect, the will, and the emotions. 

1104 Today there was a beautiful teaching [by Father Plaza on the goodness and mercy of God. 
During this conference my soul experienced the flames of God's love, and I understood that 
God's word is a living word. 

1105 My particular examen is still the same; namely, union with the merciful Christ, and silence. 
The flower which I lay at the feet of the Mother of God for May is my practice of silence. 

1106 + Virtue without prudence is not virtue at all. We should often pray to the Holy Spirit for 
this grace of prudence. Prudence consists in discretion, rational reflection and courageous 
resolution. The final decision is always up to us. We must decide; we can and we ought to 
seek advice and light... 


1107 Today during meditation, God gave me inner light and the understanding as to what 
sanctity is and of what it consists. Although I have heard these things many times in 
conferences, the soul understands them in a different way when it comes to know of them 
through the light of God which illumines it. 

Neither graces, nor revelations, nor raptures, nor gifts granted to a soul make it perfect, but

rather the intimate union of the soul with God. These gifts are merely ornaments of the 
soul, but constitute neither its essence nor its perfection. My sanctity and perfection consist 
in the close union of my will with the will of God. God never violates our free will. It is up to 
us whether we want to receive God's grace or not. It is up to us whether we will cooperate 
with it or waste it. 

1108 In the last evening conference, which was a preparation for the renewal of vows, Father 
was speaking about the happiness that flows from the three vows, and about the reward 
that comes from observing them faithfully. Suddenly, my soul was thrown into great interior 
darkness. My soul was filled with bitterness instead of joy, and my heart was pierced with a 
sharp pain. I felt so miserable and unworthy of this grace and, conscious of my misery and 
unworthiness, I would not have dared to so much as approach the feet of the youngest 
postulant to kiss them. I saw the postulants, in spirit, beautiful and pleasing to the Lord; 
and myself, an abyss of misery. After the conference, I flung myself at the feet of the 
hidden God, midst tears and pain. I threw myself into the sea of God's infinite mercy, and 
only there did I experience relief and feel that all of His omnipotent mercy was enveloping 
me. 

1109 + 30. This is the day for the renewal of vows. 

Immediately upon my awakening, God's presence enveloped me, and I felt I was a child of 
God. Divine love was poured into my soul, and God gave me to see how everything 
depended on His will. He spoke these words to me: I want to grant a complete pardon 
to the souls that will go to Confession and receive Holy Communion on the Feast of 
My mercy. Then He said to me, My daughter, fear nothing. I am always with you, 
even if it seems to you that I am not. Your humility draws Me down from My lofty 
throne, and I unite myself closely with you. 

1110 29 [April 1937]. The Lord gave me to know about the disputes r 1921 that were going on in 
the Vatican concerning this Feast. The dignitary Pacelli did much work on this. 

1111 Today is the renewal; that is, the profession of vows r 1931 in the course of a solemn 
celebration. As the sisters were making their vows, I heard angels singing in various tones, 
"Holy, Holy, Holy," with chanting so delightful that no human tongue could ever match it. 


1112 In the afternoon, I talked with my beloved Mother Directress of Novices, Mother Mary 
Joseph. We walked once around the garden, and I was able to have a talk with her, 
although it was a rather general one. She is ever the same beloved Mother Directress of 
Novices, although she is in fact no longer the directress, but a Superior, and it is already 
ten years since I pronounced my vows. She told me that it is impossible for a religious to 
live without the cross. However, she revealed to me a certain suffering which I had 
experienced in Warsaw, although I had never told her about it. All the graces which I had 
received during the novitiate came back vividly before the eyes of my soul. Oh, how 
grateful I am to her! When my soul was plunged in darkness, and it seemed to me that I 
was damned, she wrenched me from that abyss by the power of obedience. 

1113 My soul is often burdened with suffering, and there is no human being who can understand 
these torments. 

1114 May 1, 1937. Today I felt the nearness of my Mother, my heavenly Mother, although before 
every Holy Communion I earnestly ask the Mother of God to help me prepare my soul for 
the coming of Her Son, and I clearly feel Her protection over me. I entreat Her to be so 
gracious as to enkindle in me the fire of God's love, such as burned in Her own pure heart 
at the time of the I ncarnation of the Word of God. 

1115 May 4. Today I went to see Mother General [Michael] for a moment and asked her, "Dear 
Mother, have you had any inspiration regarding my leaving the convent?" Mother General 
answered, "Until the present, Sister, I have always restrained you, but now I leave you 
complete freedom to choose to do as you wish; you can leave the Congregation or you can 
stay." So I answered, "Very well." I thought of writing immediately to the Holy Father to ask 
him to release me from my vows. ri94i When I had left Mother General, darkness once again 
descended upon my soul, as it had in the past. It is strange that, each time I ask

permission to leave the Congregation, this darkness invades my soul, and I feel as though I 
have been left completely on my own. While experiencing this torment of the spirit, I 
decided to go immediately to Mother and tell her about my strange torment and struggle. 
Mother answered, "That leaving of yours is a temptation." After talking to her for a while I 
felt some relief, but the darkness persisted. "This Divine Mercy is a beautiful thing, and it 
must be a great work of the Lord, since Satan opposes it so much and wants to destroy it." 
Such were the words of our beloved Mother General. 

1116 No one can understand or comprehend, nor can I myself describe, my torments. But there 
can be no sufferings greater than this. The sufferings of the martyrs are not greater 
because, at such times, death would be a relief for me. There is nothing to which I can 
compare these sufferings, this endless agony of the soul. 

1117 May 5, [1937]. Today, I opened up my soul somewhat in confession, because it occurred to 
me that perhaps this is the real temptation: that at the time I ask to be allowed to leave the 
Congregation I experience such great suffering and darkness. To this the confessor replied 
that perhaps it was not the time appointed by God. "You must pray and wait patiently, but 

it is true that great sufferings are in store for you. You will have to bear many sufferings 
and overcome many difficulties; that much is certain. It would be better to wait and to pray 
much for deeper knowledge and for divine light. These are grave matters." 


1118 My God! In these difficult moments my spiritual director [Father Andrasz] is away, for he 
has gone to Rome. Jesus, since You have taken him away from me, guide me Yourself, 
because You alone know how much I can bear. I believe firmly that God cannot give me 
more than I can bear. I trust in His mercy. 

1119 In the moments when I am between heaven and earth, I keep silent, because even if I did 
speak, who would understand what I say? Eternity will reveal many things about which I am 
now silent... 

1120 When I went out into the garden, I saw how everything was breathing the joy of spring. The 
trees, adorned with flowers, gave off an intoxicating odor. Everything was throbbing with 
joy, and the birds were singing and chirping their adoration of God and said to me, "Rejoice 
and be happy, Sister Faustina"; but my soul remains in torment and darkness. My soul is so 
sensitive to the rustle of grace [that] it knows how to talk with all created things and with 
everything that surrounds me, and I know why God has adorned the earth in this way... But 
my heart cannot be joyful because my Beloved has hidden Himself from me, and I will not 
rest until I find Him... I do not know how to live without God, but I also feel that God, 
absolutely self-sufficient though He is, cannot be happy without me... 

1121 May 6, [1937]. The Ascension of Our Lord. 

Since early this morning, my soul has been touched by God. After Holy Communion, I 
communed for a while with the heavenly Father. My soul was drawn into the glowing center 
of love. I understood that no exterior works could stand comparison with pure love of God... 

I saw the joy of the I ncarnate Word, and I was immersed in the Divine Trinity. When I came 
to myself, longing filled my soul, and I yearned to be united with God. Such tremendous 
love for the heavenly Father enveloped me that I call this day an uninterrupted ecstasy of 
love. The whole universe seemed to me like a tiny drop in comparison with God. There is no 
greater happiness than when God gives me to know interiorly that every beat of my heart is 
pleasing to Him, and when He shows me that He loves me in a special way. This strong 
inner conviction, by which God assures me of His love for me and of how much my soul 
pleases Him, brings deep peace to my soul. Throughout this day I was unable to take any 
food; I felt gratified to the full with love. 

1122 God of great mercy, who deigned to send us Your only begotten Son as the greatest proof 
of Your fathomless love and mercy, You do not reject sinners; but in Your boundless mercy 
You have opened for them also Your treasures, treasures from which they can draw 
abundantly, not only justification, but also all the sanctity that a soul can attain. Father of 
great mercy, I desire that all hearts turn with confidence to Your infinite mercy. No one will

be justified before You if he is not accompanied by Your unfathomable mercy. When You 
reveal the mystery of Your mercy to us, there will not be enough of eternity to properly 
thank You for it. 

1123 Oh, how sweet it is to have in the depth of one's soul that which the Church tells us we 
must believe. When my soul is immersed in love, I solve the most intricate questions clearly 
and quickly. Only love is able to cross over precipices and mountain peaks. Love, once 
again, love. 

1124 + 12 [May 1937]. A strange darkness sometimes invades my intellect. I am submerged in 
nothingness 1 against my will. 



1125 May 20, 1937. When for a whole month I had been enjoying good health, it occurred to me 
that I did not know which was more pleasing to the Lord-my serving Him in illness or in the 
robust health for which I had asked Him-and I said to the Lord, "Jesus, do with me as You 
please," and Jesus returned me to my previous condition. 

1126 Oh, how sweet it is to live in a convent among sisters, but I must not forget that these 
angels are in human bodies. 

1127 On one occasion, I saw Satan hurrying about and looking for someone among the sisters, 
but he could find no one. I felt an interior inspiration to command him in the Name of God 
to confess to me what he was looking for among the sisters. And he confessed, though 
unwillingly, "I am looking for idle souls [cf. Si. 33:28; Pr. 12:11]." When I commanded him 
again in the Name of God to tell me to which souls in religious life he has the easiest 
access, he said, again unwillingly, "To lazy and idle souls." I took note of the fact that, at 
present, there were no such souls in this house. Let the toiling and tired souls rejoice. 

1128 May 22, 1937. The heat is so intense today that it is difficult to bear. We are all thirsting for 
rain, and still it does not come. For several days the sky has been overcast, but there is no 
rain. When I looked at the plants, thirsting for the rain. I was moved with pity, and I 
decided to say the chaplet until the Lord would send us rain. Before supper, the sky covered 
over with clouds, and a heavy rain fell on the earth. I had been saying this prayer without 
interruption for three hours. And the Lord let me know that everything can be obtained by 
means of this prayer. 

[May] 23. The Feast of the Most Holy Trinity. 

1129 During Holy Mass, I found myself suddenly united with the Most Holy Trinity. I recognized 
His majesty and greatness. I was united to the Three Persons. And once I was united to 
One of these Most Venerable Persons, I was at the same time united to the other Two 
Persons. The joy and happiness that my soul felt is beyond description. It grieves me that I 
am unable to put down in words that which has no words. 

1130 I heard these words: Tell the Superior General to count on you as the most faithful 
daughter in the Order. ri95i 

1131 After these words, I received an inner understanding of what all created things are before 
God. Immense and incomprehensible is His majesty. And that He condescends toward us is 
the abyss of His mercy... 

1132 All things will have an end in this vale of tears, 

Tears will run dry and pain will cease. 

Only one thing will remain - 
Love for You, 0 Lord. 

All things will have an end in this exile, 

The ordeals and wilderness of the soul. 

And though she live in perpetual agony, 

If God is with her, nothing can shake her. 


1133 27 [May 1937]. Corpus Christi. 

During prayer, I heard these words: My daughter, let your heart be filled with joy. I, 
the Lord, am with you. Fear nothing. You are in My heart. At that moment, I knew the 
great majesty of God, and I understood that nothing could be compared with one single 
perception of God. Outward greatness dwindles like a speck of dust before one act of a 
deeper knowledge of God. 

1134 The Lord has poured such a depth of peace into my soul that nothing will disturb it any 
more. Despite everything that goes on around me, I am not deprived of my peace for a 
moment. Even if the whole world were crumbling, it would not disturb the depth of the 
silence which is within me and in which God rests. All events, all the various things which 
happen are under His foot. 

1135 This deeper knowledge of God gives me full liberty and spiritual freedom, and nothing can 
disturb my close union with Him, not even the angelic powers. I feel that I am great when I

am united to God. What happiness it is to have the consciousness of God in one's heart and 
to live in close intimacy with Him. 

1136 When the procession from Borek ri 96 i came to our house, carrying Him who was to be 
reposed in our chapel, I heard a voice coming from the Host: Here is My repose. During 
Benediction, Jesus gave me to know that soon a solemn moment would take place on this 
very spot. I am pleased to rest in your heart and nothing will stop Me from granting 
you graces. This greatness of God floods my soul, and I drown in Him, I lose myself in 
Him, I am melting away in Him... 

1137 May 30, [1937]. I am dying of yearning for God today. This longing fills all my soul. How 
very much I feel I am in exile. 0 Jesus, when will the longed-for moment come? 

1138 May 31. My tormented soul finds aid nowhere but in You, 0 Living Host. I place all my trust 
in Your merciful heart. I am waiting patiently for Your word, Lord. 

1139 Oh, what pain it causes my heart when I see a nun who has not the religious spirit! How 
can one be pleasing to God when one is inflated with pride and self-love under the pretense 
of striving for God's glory, while in fact one is seeking one's own glory? When I see such a 
thing, it gives me very great pain. How can such a soul be united closely with God? Union 
with the Lord is out of the question here. 

1140 J une 1, 1937. Today, the Corpus Christi procession r 1971 took place. At the first altar, a 
flame issued from the Host and pierced my heart, and I heard a voice, Here is My resting 
place. My heart was enflamed, and I felt that I was transformed completely into Him. 

1141 In the evening, He gave me to understand how fleeting all earthly things are, and [how] 
everything that appears great disappears like smoke, and does not give the soul freedom, 
but weariness. Happy the soul that understands these things and with only one foot touches 
the earth. My repose is to be united with You; everything else tires me. Oh, how much I feel 
I am in exile! I see that no one understands my interior life. You alone understand me, You 
who are hidden in my heart and yet are eternally alive. 


1142 J une 4. Today is the Feast of the Most Sacred Heart of J esus. During Holy Mass, I was given 
the knowledge of the Heart of J esus and of the nature of the fire of love with which He 
burns for us and of how He is an Ocean of Mercy. Then I heard a voice: Apostle of My 
mercy, proclaim to the whole world My unfathomable mercy. Do not be 
discouraged by the difficulties you encounter in proclaiming My mercy. These 
difficulties that affect you so painfully are needed for your sanctification and as 
evidence that this work is Mine. My daughter, be diligent in writing down every 
sentence I tell you concerning My mercy, because this is meant for a great number 
of souls who will profit from it. 

1143 + During Adoration, the Lord gave me a deeper knowledge of matters connected with this 
work. 

1144 Today, I asked the Lord's pardon for all the offenses committed in our convents from which 
His divine Heart ! suffers. 

1145 + J une 6, [1937]. First Sunday of the month. Today I made my monthly retreat. 

A light from the morning meditation: Whatever You do with me, Jesus, I will always love 
You, for I am Yours. Little matter whether You leave me here or put me somewhere else; I 
am always Yours. 

It is with love that I abandon myself to Your most wise decrees, 0 God, and Your will, O 
Lord, is my daily nourishment. You, who know the beatings of my heart, know that it beats 
for You alone, my J esus. Nothing can quench my longing for You. I am dying for You, J esus. 
When will You take me into Your dwelling place [cf. J n. 14: 1-3]? 

1146 [Let] the greatest sinners place their trust in My mercy. They have the right before 
others to trust in the abyss of My mercy. My daughter, write about My mercy 
towards tormented souls. Souls that make an appeal to My mercy delight Me. To 
such souls I grant even more graces than they ask. I cannot punish even the 
greatest sinner if he makes an appeal to My compassion, but on the contrary, I 
justify him in My unfathomable and inscrutable mercy. Write: before I come as a 
just J udge, I first open wide the door of My mercy. He who refuses to pass 
through the door of My mercy must pass through the door of My justice... 

1147 When once I felt hurt because of a certain thing and complained to the Lord, Jesus

answered, My daughter, why do you attach such importance to the teaching and the 
talk of people? I myself want to teach you; that is why I arrange things so that 
you cannot attend those conferences. I n a single moment, I will bring you to know 
more than others will acquire through many years of toil. 

1148 June 20, [1937]. We resemble God most when we forgive our neighbors. God is Love, 
Goodness, and Mercy... 

Every soul, and especially the soul of every religious, should reflect My mercy. My 
Heart overflows with compassion and mercy for all. The heart of My beloved must 
resemble Mine; from her heart must spring the fountain of My mercy for souls; 
otherwise I will not acknowledge her as Mine. 



1149 + On several occasions, I have learned how some religious defend their own glory under the 
pretext of being concerned for the glory of God, whereas it is not a question of the glory of 
God, but of glory of self. O J esus, how painful this has been for me! What secrets the day of 
Your judgment will bring to light! How can one steal God's gifts? 

1150 Today, I experienced a good deal of sorrow because of a certain person, a lay person, that 
is. On the basis of one true thing, she said many things which were fictitious. And because 
they were taken to be true and spread around the whole house, when the news reached my 
ears, my heart felt a twinge of pain. How can one abuse the goodness of others like that? 
But I resolved not to say a word in my defense and to show even greater kindness toward 
that person. I became aware, however, that I was not strong enough to bear this calmly, 
because the matter lingered on for weeks. When I saw the storm building up and the wind 
beginning to blow sand straight into my eyes, I went before the Blessed Sacrament and said 
to the Lord, "Lord J esus, I ask You to give me the strength of Your actual grace, because I 
feel that I will not manage to survive this struggle. Shield me with Your breast." 

Then I heard the words, Do not fear; I am with you. When I left the altar, an 
extraordinary peace and power filled my soul, and the storm that was raging broke against 
my soul as against a rock; and the foam of the storm fell on those who had raised it. Oh, 
how good is the Lord, who will reward each one according to his deed! Let every soul beg 
for the help of actual grace, as sometimes ordinary grace is not enough. 


Notebook I: 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-521 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801 -850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1 001-1050 t 1051-1 100 t 1101-1150 t 1 151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-1321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 - 1450 t 1 451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804- 1 828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 3 


1151 + When pain overwhelms my soul, 

And the horizon darkens like night, 

And the heart is torn with the torment of suffering, 

Jesus Crucified, You are my strength. 

When the soul, dimmed with pain, 

Exerts itself in battle without respite, 

And the heart is in agony and torment, 

Jesus Crucified, You are the hope of my salvation. 

And so the days pass, 

As the soul bathes in a sea of bitterness, 

And the heart dissolves in tears, 

Jesus Crucified, You shine for me like the dawn. 

And when the cup of bitterness brims over, 

And all things conspire against her, 

And the soul goes down to the Garden of Olives, 

Jesus Crucified, in You is my defense. 

When the soul, conscious of its innocence, 

Accepts these dispensations from God, 

The heart can then repay hurts with love. 

Jesus Crucified, transform my weakness into omnipotence. 

1152 It is no easy thing to bear sufferings joyfully, especially those which are unmerited. Fallen 
nature rebels, and although the intellect and will are above suffering, because they are able 
to do good to those who inflict suffering on them, nevertheless the emotions raise a lot of 
noise and, like restless spirits, attack the intellect and will. But when they see they cannot

do anything by themselves, they quiet down and submit to the intellect and will. Like some 
kind of hideousness, they rush in and stir up a row, bent on making one obey them alone so 
long as they are not curbed by the intellect and will. 

1153 June 23, [1937]. As I was praying before the Most Blessed Sacrament, my physical 
sufferings ceased suddenly, and I heard this voice in my soul: You see, I can give you 
everything in one moment. I am not constrained by any law. 

June 24. After Holy Communion, I heard these words: Know, My daughter, that in one 
moment I can give you everything that is needed for the fulfillment of this task. 

After these words, an extraordinary light remained in my soul, and all God's demands 
seemed to me to be so simple that even a little child could carry them out. 



1154 [June] 27. Today, I saw the convent of the new Congregation. It was a large and spacious 
building. I went from room to room, observing everything. I saw that God's Providence had 
provided for all that was necessary. The persons living in this convent were still wearing lay 
clothes, but a thoroughly religious spirit reigned there, and I was organizing everything just 
as the Lord wanted. All of a sudden, I heard a rebuke from one of our sisters, "Sister, how 
can you carry out such works?" I answered that it was not I, but the Lord working through 
me, and that I had the authorization for everything. During Mass, I received light and 
profound understanding concerning this whole work, and not a shadow of a doubt remained 
in my soul. 

1155 The Lord gave me knowledge of His will under three aspects, so to speak, but it all comes 
down to one. ri98i 

The first is that souls separated from the world will burn as an offering before God's throne 
and beg for mercy for the whole world... and by their entreaties they will obtain blessings 
for priests, and through their prayers prepare the world for the final coming of Jesus. 

1156 The second is prayer joined to the act of mercy. In particular, they will defend the souls of 
children against the spirit of evil. Prayer and merciful deeds are all that will be required of 
these souls, and even the poorest persons can be admitted to their number. And in this 
egoistic world they will try to rouse up love, the mercy of Jesus. 

1157 The third is prayer and deeds of mercy, without any obligation of taking vows. But by doing 
this, these persons will have a share in all the merits and privileges of the whole 
[congregation]. Everyone in the world can belong to this group. 

1158 A member of this group ought to perform at least one act of mercy a day; at least one, but 
there can be many more, for such deeds can easily be carried out by anyone, even the very 
poorest. For there are three ways of performing an act of mercy: the merciful word, by 
forgiving and by comforting; secondly, if you can offer no word, then pray-that too is 
mercy; and thirdly, deeds of mercy. And when the Last Day comes, we shall be judged from 
this, and on this basis we shall receive the eternal verdict. 

1159 God's floodgates have been opened for us. Let us want to take advantage of them before 
the day of God's justice arrives. And that will be a dreadful day! 

1160 When once I asked the Lord J esus how He could tolerate so many sins and crimes and not 
punish them, the Lord answered me, I have eternity for punishing [these], and so I am 

prolonging the time of mercy for the sake of [sinners]. But woe to them if they do 
not recognize this time of My visitation. My daughter, secretary of My mercy, your 
duty is not only to write about and proclaim My mercy, but also to beg for this 
grace for them, so that they too may glorify My mercy. 

1161 Today, my soul suffered such agony that I began to complain to the Lord J esus, "J esus, how 
can You leave me alone? I cannot take even one step forward by myself. You have taken 
my confessor away, and You yourself are hiding from me. Surely, You know, Jesus, that of 
myself I know nothing but how to waste Your graces. Jesus, You must arrange things so 
that Father Andrasz will return." But the anguish persisted. 


1162 It occurred to me to go to some priest and tell him of my anguish as well as some various 
inspirations, that he might resolve them for me; and I shared this idea with Mother Superior 
[Irene]. Mother replied, "I understand, Sister, that you are going through a difficult time,

but at present, I really do not know of any priest who would be suitable for you. At any 
rate, Father Andrasz will be returning soon. So, for now, go and tell everything to the Lord 

J esus." 

1163 When I went to talk with the Lord for a while, I heard a voice in my soul: My- I will not 

give you the grace to reveal yourself to someone else, and even if you did bare 
yourself, I will not give that priest the grace needed to understand you. At this 
time, it is My desire that you put up with yourself patiently. My daughter, it is not 
My will that you should tell everybody about the gifts I have granted you. I have 
entrusted you to the care of the friend of My Heart, and under his direction your 
soul will bloom. I have given him light to recognize My life in your soul. 

1164 My daughter, when I was before Herod, I obtained a grace for you; namely, that 
you would be able to rise above human scorn and follow faithfully in My footsteps. 
Be silent when they do not want to acknowledge your truth,