 that for some time, with my head on the floor. When I 
came to, I became aware that my whole body was pressing on my head and face, and that I 
was covered with vomit. I thought it would be the end of me. Dear Mother Superior [Irene] 
and Sister Tarcisia 238 were trying to help me as best they could. J esus demanded suffering, 
but not death. 0 my Jesus, do with me as You please. Only give me strength to suffer. 

Since Your strength supports me, I shall bear everything. 0 souls, how I love you! 

1614 Today, one of the sisters [probably Sister Amelia 239 ] came to see me and said, "Sister, I 
have a strange feeling, as though something were telling me to come to you and commend 
to you certain problems of mine before you die, and that perhaps you will be able to 
beseech the Lord J esus and arrange these things for me. Something keeps telling me that 
you will be able to obtain this for me." I answered her with equal frankness that, yes, I felt 
in my soul that after my death I would be able to obtain more from the Lord J esus than at 
the present time. "I will remember you, Sister, before His throne." 

1615 When I entered the neighboring dormitory to visit the sisters who were ill, one of them said 
to me, "Sister, when you die I will not fear you at all. Come to see me after you die, 
because I want to confide to you a secret concerning my soul, something I want you to 
settle for me with the Lord J esus. I know you can obtain this from Him." Because she was 
speaking in public I answered her in this way: "The Lord Jesus is very discreet. And so He

never betrays to anyone a secret that is between Him and a soul." 

1616 + 0 my Lord, thank You for conforming me to Yourself through immolation. I see that this 
earthly vessel is beginning to crumble. I rejoice in this, because soon I will be in my 
Father's house [cf. Jn. 14:2]. 

1617 February 27, [1938]. Today, I went to confession to Father An. [Andrasz] I did as Jesus 
wanted. After confession, a surge of light filled my soul. Then I heard a voice: Because 
you are a child, you shall remain close to My Heart. Your simplicity is more 
pleasing to Me than your mortifications. 

1618 Father An. [Andrasz's] words: Live more by faith. Pray that the Divine Mercy become more 
widely known, and that the work may come into good hands that will manage it well. As for 
yourself, try to be a good religious here-although things may turn out that way also- but try 
to be a good religious right here. And now, if you feel those urgings from the Lord and 
recognize that it is He, follow them. Devote to prayer all the time that is set apart for it, and 
make your notations afterwards... 

1619 + The last two days of carnival. 240 My physical sufferings have intensified. I am uniting 
myself more closely with the suffering Savior, asking Him for mercy for the whole world, 
which is running riot in its wickedness. Throughout the day I felt the pain of the crown of 
thorns. When I lay down, I could not rest my head on the pillow. But at ten o'clock the 
pains ceased, and I fell asleep; but the next day I felt very exhausted. 


1620 + J esus- Host, if You Yourself did not sustain me, I would not be able to persevere on the 
cross. I would not be able to endure so much suffering. But the power of Your grace 
maintains me on a higher level and makes my sufferings meritorious. You give me strength 
always to move forward and to gain heaven by force and to have love in my heart for those 
from whom I suffer adversities and contempt. With Your grace one can do all things. 

1621 March 1, 1938. One-day Retreat. 

In meditation, I learned that I should hide myself as deeply as possible in the Heart of 
Jesus, meditate upon His Sorrowful Passion, and penetrate into the sentiments of His Divine 
Heart, which is full of mercy for sinners. In order to obtain mercy for them, I will empty 
myself at every moment, living by the will of God. 

1622 Throughout this Lent, I am a host in Your hand, Jesus. Make use of me so that You may 
enter into sinners Yourself. Demand anything You like; no sacrifice will seem too much for 
me when souls are at stake. 

1623 + I have offered this whole month's Masses and Holy Communions for the intention of 
Father Andrasz, that God may give him an even deeper knowledge of His love and mercy. 

1624 This month I will practice the three virtues recommended to me by the Mother of God: 
humility, purity and love of God, accepting with profound submission to the will of God 
everything that He will send me. 

1625 March 2, [ 1938], I began Holy Lent in the way that J esus wanted me to, making myself 
totally dependent upon His holy will and accepting with love everything that He sends me. I 
cannot practice any greater mortifications, because I am so very weak. This long illness has 
sapped my strength completely. I am uniting myself with Jesus through suffering. When I 
meditate on His Painful Passion, my physical sufferings are lessened. 

1626 The Lord said to me, I am taking you into My school for the whole of Lent. I want to 
teach you how to suffer. I answered, "With You, Lord, I am ready for everything." And I 
heard a voice, You are allowed to drink from the cup from which I drink. I give you 
that exclusive privilege today... 

1627 Today I felt the Passion of J esus in my whole body, and the Lord gave me knowledge of the 
conversion of certain souls. 

1628 During Holy Mass, I saw Jesus stretched out on the Cross, and He said to me, My pupil, 
have great love for those who cause you suffering. Do good to those who hate 
you. I answered, "0 my Master, You see very well that I feel no love for them, and that 
troubles me." J esus answered, 1 1 is not always within your power to control your 
feelings. You will recognize that you have love if, after having experienced 
annoyance and contradiction, you do not lose your peace, but pray for those who 
have made you suffer and wish them well. When I returned [...] 


+ J.M.J. 



1629 I am a host in Your hand, 

0 J esus, my Creator and Lord,

Silent, hidden, without beauty or charm, 

Because all the beauty of my soul is imprinted within me. 

1 am a host in Your hand, 0 Divine Priest, 

Do with me as You please; 

I am totally dependent on Your will, O Lord 
Because it is the delight and adornment of my soul. 

I am like a white host in Your hand, 0 God, 

I implore You, transform me into Yourself. 

May I be wholly hidden in You, 

Locked in Your merciful Heart as in Heaven. 

I am like a host in Your hand, O Eternal Priest, 

May the wafer of my body hide me from human eye; 

May Your eye alone measure my love and devotion, 

Because my heart is always united with Your Divine Heart. 

I am like a sacrificial host in Your hand, 0 Divine Mediator, 

And I burn on the altar of holocaust, 

Crushed and ground by suffering like grains of wheat, 

And all this for the sake of Your glory, for the salvation of souls. 

I am a host abiding in the tabernacle of Your Heart. 

I go through life drowned in Your love, 

And I fear nothing in the world, 

For You Yourself are my shield, my strength, and my defense. 

I am a host, laid on the altar of Your Heart, 

To burn forever with the fire of love, 

For I know that You have lifted me up solely because of Your mercy, 

And so I turn all these gifts and graces to Your glory. 

I am a host in Your hand, 0 J udge and Savior. 

In the last hour of my life, 

May the omnipotence of Your grace lead me to my goal, 

May Your compassion on the vessel of mercy become famous. 

1630 J esus, fortify the powers of my soul that the enemy gain nothing. Without You, I am 
weakness itself. What am I without Your grace if not an abyss of my own misery? Misery is 
my possession. 



1631 0 Wound of Mercy, Heart of Jesus, hide me in Your depths as a drop of Your own blood, and 
do not let me out forever! Lock me in Your depths, and do You Yourself teach me to love 
You! Eternal Love, do You Yourself form my soul that it be made capable of returning Your 
love. O living Love, enable me to love You forever. I yearn to eternally reciprocate Your 
love. O Christ, a single gaze from You is dearer to me than a thousand worlds, than all 
heaven itself. Lord, You can make my soul capable of understanding completely who You 
are. I know and I believe that You can do all things; if You have deigned to give Yourself to 
me so generously, then I know that You can be even more generous. Bring me into an 
intimacy with You so far as it is possible for human nature to be brought... 

+ J.M.J. 

1632 The desires of my heart are so great and incomprehensible 
That nothing can fill the abyss of my heart. 

Even the most beautiful things, gathered from all over the world, 

Would not for a moment fill Your place for me, 0 God. 

With one glance, I penetrated the whole world, 

And I found no other love like the love of my heart. 

Therefore I looked into the world of eternity because this one is too small for me. 

My heart has desired the love of the Immortal One. 

My heart has sensed that I am a royal child, 

That I have found myself in exile, in a foreign land. 

I see that the heavenly palace is my home; 

Only there will I feel as in my own fatherland. 

You Yourself have drawn my soul to You, 0 Lord; 

0 Eternal Word, You Yourself have stooped to me, 

Giving my soul a deeper knowledge of Yourself. 

Behold, the mystery of love for which You have created me! 

Pure love has made me strong and brave. 

1 fear neither the seraphim nor the cherubim, standing with sword in hand, 

And I pass over with ease where others tremble, 

Because there is nothing to fear, there where love is the guide. 

And suddenly the eye of my soul came to rest upon You, 

O Lord Jesus Christ, stretched upon the Cross. 

Here is my Love, with whom I will rest in my grave, 

This is my Bridegroom, my incomprehensible Lord and God. 


[Here occurs a bigger space in the Diary.] 



1633 March 10, [1938]. Continuous physical suffering. I am on the cross with Jesus. On one 
occasion, M. Superior [Irene] said to me, "It is a lack of love of neighbor on your part, 

Sister, that you eat something and then you suffer and disturb the others during their 
night's rest." Yet I know for sure that these pains which occur in my intestines are not at all 
caused by food. The doctor [probably Dr. Silberg] has said the same thing. These sufferings 
come from the body itself, or rather are a visitation of the Lord. Nevertheless, after that

remark I resolved to suffer in secret and not to ask for help, because it is of no avail 
anyway, since I throw up the medicines that are given to me. 

Many a time, I have managed to suffer through attacks that were known only to Jesus. The 
pains are so violent and severe that they cause me to lose consciousness. When they cause 
me to faint, and I am drenched in cold sweat, then they gradually begin to go away. 
Sometimes they last three hours or more. 0 my J esus, may Your holy will be done; I accept 
everything from Your hand. If I accept the delights and raptures of love to the point of 
becoming oblivious to what is going on around me, it is only right that I should accept with 
love these sufferings which cause me to faint. 

1634 When the doctor 24i came, I could not go down to the parlor to see him, like the other 
sisters, but asked that he come to my cell, because I could not go down due to a certain 
difficulty. After a while, he came to the cell and, having examined me, said, "I'll tell 
everything to the Sister I nfirmarian." When the Sister Infirmarian came, after the doctor 
had left, I told her why I hadn't been able to go down to the parlor, but she gave me to 
know how very displeased she was. And when I asked, "Sister, what did the doctor say 
about these pains?" she answered that he had said nothing, that it was nothing, that he had 
said the patient was just sulking. And with that she went off. Then I said to God, "Christ, 
give me strength and power to suffer; give to my heart a pure love for this sister." After 
that, she did not look in on me again for a whole week. But the sufferings returned with 
great violence and lasted almost the whole night, and it seemed that it would be the end, 
then and there. The superiors decided to approach another doctor, 242 and he ascertained 
that my condition was serious and said to me, "It will not be possible to return you to good 
health. We can remedy your condition partially, but complete recovery is out of question." 
He prescribed a medicine for the pains, and after I had taken it, the major attacks did not 
return. "But if you come here, Sister, we will try to patch up your health somehow, if that is 
still possible." The doctor very much wanted me to go there for a treatment. 243 0 my 
Jesus, how strange are Your decrees! 

1635 J esus orders me to write all this for the consolation of other souls who will often be exposed 
to similar sufferings. 

1636 Although I was feeling very weak, I went to see the doctor [Silberg], because that was the 
superior's will. The sister who was my companion was very unhappy about this. She made 
this known to me several times and finally said, "What are we going to do? I don't have 
enough money to pay for the cab." I answered nothing. "And what if there is no cab? How 
are we going to get there? It's such a long way." She said this and many other things just 
to worry me, because our dear superiors had given us enough money for everything, and 
we didn't run short. And understanding this whole business within myself, I laughed and 
told sister that I was not worried one bit: "Let's trust in God." But I saw that my deep peace 
was getting on her nerves, and so I started to pray for her intention. 


1637 O my Lord, all this is for You and to obtain mercy for poor sinners. When I returned, I was 
so very tired that I had to lie down right away. But it was the day for the quarterly 
confession. I tried to go to confession, not only because I had need to do so, but also to ask 
advice of my spiritual director [Father Andrasz]. I began to prepare myself; however I felt 
so weak that I decided to go ask Mother Superior [Irene] to allow me to go before the 
novices. Mother Superior answered, "Go and look for the Directress of Novices [Sister 
Callista]. If she allows you to go before the novices, it is all right with me." However, there 
were only three sisters ahead of me, waiting for confession, and so I waited because I did 
not have enough strength to go and look for the Directress of Novices. When I went in to 
make my confession I was feeling so bad that I could not give an account of the condition of 
my soul; I barely managed to make my confession. At that point, I noted how much the 
spirit is needed; the letter itself does not make love grow [cf. 2 Cor. 3:6]. 

1638 On that day, there arose some misunderstandings between the Superior and myself.

Neither she nor I was to blame, but moral suffering remained, because I could not explain 
the matter in question, since it was a secret. This was the reason why I suffered, even 
though, by a single word, I could have revealed the truth. 

1639 The 20th [of March]. Today, in spirit, I accompanied a certain dying soul. I obtained trust in 
God's mercy for her. The soul was near despair. 

1640 This night is known only to You, O Lord. I have offered it for poor obdurate sinners, to 
obtain Your mercy for them. Scourge me here, burn me here, as long as You give me the 
souls of sinners, and especially.... O Jesus, with You nothing is lost; take everything and 
give me souls... sinners. 

1641 At adoration during the Forty-Hours' Devotion, the Lord said to me, My daughter, write 
that involuntary offenses of souls do not hinder My love for them or prevent Me 
from uniting Myself with them. But voluntary offenses, even the smallest, obstruct 
My graces, and I cannot lavish My gifts on such souls. 

1642 + Jesus gave me to know of how everything is dependent on His will, thus giving me 
profound peace as regards the security of His work. 

1643 Listen, My daughter, although all the works that come into being by My will are 
exposed to great sufferings, consider whether any of them has been subject to 
greater difficulties than that work which is directly Mine-the work of Redemption. 
You should not worry too much about adversities. The world is not as powerful as 
it seems to be; its strength is strictly limited. Know, My daughter, that if your soul 
is filled with the fire of My pure love, then all difficulties dissipate like fog before 
the sun's rays and dare not touch the soul. All adversaries are afraid to start a 
quarrel with such a soul, because they sense that it is stronger than the whole 
world... 

1644 My daughter, do as much for this work of mercy as obedience allows, but present 
clearly to your confessor the very least of My demands, and he will decide. You 
must not shirk in any way, but carry out everything faithfully; otherwise, I would 
find no pleasure in you... 



1645 March 25, 1938. Today, I saw the suffering Lord Jesus. He leaned down toward me and 
whispered softly, My daughter, help Me to save sinners. Suddenly, a burning desire to 
save souls entered my soul. When I recovered my senses, I knew just how I was to help 
souls, and I prepared myself for greater sufferings. 

1646 + Today [probably Friday, March 25, 1938] my suffering increased; in addition, I felt 
wounds in my hands, feet and side. I endured this with patience. I sensed the hostility of 
the enemy of souls, but he did not touch me. 

1647 April 1, [1938]. Once again, I am feeling worse today. A high fever is beginning to consume 
me, and I cannot take any food. I would like to have something refreshing to drink, but 
there is not even any water in my pitcher. All this, 0 Jesus, to obtain mercy for souls. 

Just as I was renewing my intention with greater love, one of the novices came in and gave 
me a big orange which had been sent by the Directress of Novices [Sister Callista]. I saw 
the Lord's hand in this. The same thing happened again, several times. During this time, 
although my needs were known, I never received anything refreshing to eat, even though I 
had asked for it. However, I knew that God was demanding suffering and sacrifices. I am 
not writing in detail about these refusals, because these are delicate matters, and it is 
difficult to believe. Yet God can demand even such sacrifices. 

1648 I was about to ask Mother Superior [Irene] to allow me to have something in my cell with 
which to quench my great thirst, but before I managed to ask, Mother herself began to 
speak, "Sister, let's make an end of this illness once and for all, one way or another. You'll 
have to undergo regular treatment or something. Things can't go on like this any longer." A 
little later when I was alone I said, "Christ, what am I to do? Am I to ask You for health or 
for death?" I had no clear command, so I knelt down and said, "May Your holy will be done 
in my , regard. Do with me, Jesus, as You please." At that very moment, I felt as though I 
were all alone, and various temptations attacked me. But I found peace and light in earnest 
prayer, and I understood that the superior only wished to test me. 

1649 I don't know how this happens, but the room in which I have been lying has been very

much neglected. Sometimes, it has not been cleaned for more than two weeks. Often, no 
one would light a fire in the stove, and so my cough would get worse. Sometimes I would 
ask to have a fire lit, and at other times I did not have the courage to ask. On one occasion, 
when Mother Superior [Irene] came to see me and asked me if perhaps it was necessary to 
heat the room more, I said, No, because it was already getting warmer outside, and we had 
the window open. 

1650 First Friday. When I took the Messenger of the Sacred Heart into my hand and read the 
account of the canonization of Saint Andrew Bobola, my soul was instantly filled with a 
great longing that our Congregation, too, might have a saint, and I wept like a child that 
there was no saint in our midst. And I said to the Lord, "I know Your generosity, and yet it 
seems to me that You are less generous toward us." And I began again to weep like a little 
child. And the Lord J esus said to me, Don't cry. You are that saint. Then the light of God 
inundated my soul, and I was given to know how much I was to suffer, and I said to the 
Lord, "How will that come about? You have been speaking to me about another 
Congregation." And the Lord answered, It is not for you to know how this will come 
about. Your duty is to be faithful to My grace and to do always what is within your 
power and what obedience allows you to do... 



Notebook I: 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 


301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-521 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801 -850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1 001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1 .51-1200 t 1 201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231- 1 321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401- 1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804- 1 828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 6 


1651 + Today one of the sisters came into my room and said that such-and-such a sister was 
very fussy over her own illness, and that she found this very annoying and would gladly 
give her a piece of her mind were it not for the fact that she was not a member of this 
convent. I answered that I was surprised that she should even think in such a way: "Sister, 
just think of how many sleepless nights this sick sister has been through and of how many 
tears..." The sister then came to think differently. 

+ J.M.J. 

1652 Adore, my soul, the mercy of the Lord, 

0 my heart, rejoice wholly in Him, 

Because for this you have been chosen by Him, 

To spread the glory of His mercy. 

His goodness no one has fathomed, no one can measure, 

His compassion is untold. 

Every soul that approaches Him experiences this. 

He will shield her and clasp her to His merciful bosom. 

Happy the soul that has trusted in Your goodness 
And has abandoned herself completely to Your mercy. 

Her soul is filled with the peace of love. 

You defend her everywhere as Your own child. 

0 soul, whoever you may be in this world, 

Even if your sins were as black as night, 

Do not fear God, weak child that you are, 

For great is the power of God's mercy. 

+ J.M.J. 

1653 The light above, where my God reigns, 

This it is that my soul yearns for, T 
his it is for which my heart longs, 

And my whole being bounds towards You. 

1 hasten on to the other world, to God alone, 

Into the incomprehensible light, the very fire of love, 

For my soul and my heart are created for Him, 

And my heart has loved Him from my tender youth. 

There, in the resplendent light of Your countenance 
My languishing love will rest. 

For Your virgin agonizes for You in her exile, 



For she lives only when united with You. 

+ J. M. J. 

My day is drawing to a close, 

Even now I glimpse the refulgence of Your light, 0 my God. 

No one shall learn of what my heart is feeling; 

My lips shall fall silent in great humility. 

Even now, I draw nigh to the eternal nuptials, 

To heaven unending, to spaces without limit. 

I long for no repose or reward; 

The pure love of God draws me to heaven. 

Even now, I go to meet You, eternal Love 
With a heart languishing in its desire for You.

I feel that Your pure love, Lord, dwells in my heart, 

And I sense my eternal destiny in heaven. 

Even now, I go to my Father, in heaven eternal, 

From the land of exile, from this vale of tears, 

The earth can no longer hold back my pure heart, 

And the heights of heaven have drawn me close. 

I go, 0 my Bridegroom, I go to see Your glory, 

Which even now fills my soul with joy 

There where all heaven is plunged in Your adoration, 

I feel that my worship is pleasing to You, nothingness though I am. 

In eternal happiness, I will not forget those on earth, 

I will obtain God's mercy for all, 

And I will remember especially those who were dear to my heart, 

And the deepest absorption in God will not allow me to forget them. 

In these last moments I know not how to converse with others. 

In silence I await only You, 0 Lord. 

I know the time will come when all will understand the work of God in my soul. 
I know that such is Your will. -So be it. 

+ J. M. J. 

1654 0 truth, 0 thorny life, 

In order to pass through you victoriously 
It is necessary to lean on You, 0 Christ, 

And to be always close to You. 

I would not know how to suffer without You, 0 Christ. 

Of myself I would not be able to brave adversities. 

Alone, I would not have the courage to drink from Your cup; 

But You, Lord, are always with me, and You lead me along mysterious paths. 

A weak child, I have begun the battle in Your Name. 

I have fought bravely, though often without success, 



And I know that my efforts have pleased You, 

And I know that it is the effort alone which You eternally reward. 

0 truth, 0 life-and-death struggle, 

When I rose to do battle, an inexperienced knight, 

1 felt I had a knight's blood, though still a child, 

And therefore, 0 Christ, I needed Your help and protection. 

My heart will not rest from its efforts and struggle 
Until You Yourself call me from the field of battle. 

I will stand before You, not to receive a reward, 

But to be drowned in You, in peace forever. 

to suffer during its 
touched its lips to 
it has emptied the 

cup to the very bottom. 0 Christ, if You Yourself did not support the soul, how much could it 
do of itself? We are strong, but with Your strength; we are holy, but with Your holiness. And 
of ourselves, what are we?-less than nothing... 

+ My Jesus, You suffice me for everything else in the world. Although the sufferings are 
severe, You sustain me. Although the times of loneliness are terrible, You make them sweet 
for me. Although the weakness is great, You change it into power for me. 

1656 I do not know how to describe all that I suffer, and what I have written thus far is merely a 
drop. There are moments of suffering about which I really cannot write. But there are also 
moments in my life when my lips are silent, and there are no words for my defense, and I 
submit myself completely to the will of God; then the Lord Himself defends me and makes 
claims on my behalf, and His demands are such that they can be noticed exteriorly. 
Nevertheless, when I perceive His major interventions, which manifest themselves by way 
of punishment, then I beg Him earnestly for mercy and forgiveness. Yet I am not always 
heard. The Lord acts toward me in a mysterious manner. There are times when He Himself 
allows terrible sufferings, and then again there are times when He does not let me suffer 
and removes everything that might afflict my soul. These are His ways, unfathomable and 
incomprehensible to us. It is for us to submit ourselves completely to His holy will. There 
are mysteries that the human mind will never fathom here on earth; eternity will reveal 
them. 

1657 April 10, 1938. Palm Sunday. I attended Holy Mass, but did not have the strength to go and 
get the palm. 244 I felt so weak that I barely made it till the end of Mass. During Mass, Jesus 
gave me to know the pain of His soul, and I could clearly feel how the hymns of Hosanna 
reverberated as a painful echo in His Sacred Heart. My soul, too, was inundated by a sea of 
bitterness, and each Hosanna pierced my own heart to its depths. My whole soul was drawn 
close to J esus. I heard J esus' voice: My daughter, your compassion for Me refreshes 
Me. By meditating on My Passion, your soul acquires a distinct beauty. 


1655 + 0 Christ, if my soul had known, all at once, what it was going to have 
lifetime, it would have died of terror at the very sight; it would not have

the cup of bitterness. But as it has been given to drink a drop at a time, 


1658 I received Holy Communion upstairs, for there was no question of my going down to the 
chapel since I was exhausted because of intense sweating, and when that passed, I had a 
fever and chills. I felt completely worn out. Today, one of the J esuit Fathers [ Father 
Zukowicz 245] brought us Holy Communion. He gave the Lord to three other sisters and then 
to me; and thinking I was the last, he gave me two Hosts. But one of the novices was lying 
in bed in the next cell, and there was no Host left for her. The priest went back again and 
brought her the Lord, but J esus told me, I enter that heart unwillingly. You received 
those two Hosts, because I delayed My coming into this soul who resists My grace. 
My visit to such a soul is not pleasant for Me. At that point, my soul was drawn close to 
Him, and I received a deep inner light which gave me to understand, in spirit, all the 
workings of mercy. It was like a flash of lightning, but more distinct than if I had watched it 
for hours with the eyes of my body. 

1659 Still, in order to write anything at all, I must make use of words, though they cannot render 
all of what my soul enjoyed on seeing the glory of God's mercy. The glory of the Divine 
Mercy is resounding, even now, in spite of the efforts of its enemies and of Satan himself, 
who has a great hatred for God's mercy. This work will snatch a great number of souls from 
him, and that is why the spirit of darkness sometimes tempts good people violently, so that 
they may hinder the work. But I have clearly seen that the will of God is already being 
carried out, and that it will be accomplished to the very last detail. The enemy's greatest 
efforts will not thwart the smallest detail of what the Lord has decreed. No matter if there 
are times when the work seems to be completely destroyed; it is then that the work is 
being all the more consolidated. 

1660 My soul was filled with a peace much deeper than anything I had experienced before, a 
divine reassurance which nothing can efface, a deep peace which nothing can disturb, even 
though I were to go through the severest of ordeals. I am at peace; God Himself governs all 
things. 

1661 I spent the whole day in thanksgiving, and gratitude kept flooding my soul. 0 my God, how 
good You are, how great is Your mercy! You visit me with so many graces, me who am a 
most wretched speck of dust. Prostrating myself at Your feet, 0 Lord, I confess with a 
sincere heart that I have done nothing to deserve even the least of Your graces. It is in 
Your infinite goodness that You give Yourself to me so generously. Therefore, the greater 
the graces which my heart receives, the deeper it plunges itself in humility. 

1662 + 0 Christ, suffering for You is the delight of my heart and my soul. Prolong my sufferings 
to infinity, that I may give You a proof of my love. I accept everything that Your hand will 
hold out to me. Your love, Jesus, is enough for me. I will glorify You in abandonment and 
darkness, in agony and fear, in pain and bitterness, in anguish of spirit and grief of heart. In 
all things may You be blessed. My heart is so detached from the earth, that You Yourself are 
enough for me. There is no longer any moment in my life for self concern. 

1663 Holy Thursday [April 14, 1938]. Today I felt strong enough to take part in the ceremonies of 
the Church. During Holy Mass, Jesus stood before me and said, Look into My Heart and 
see there the love and mercy which I have for humankind, and especially for 
sinners. Look, and enter into My Passion. In an instant, I experienced and lived through 
the whole Passion of Jesus in my own heart. I was surprised that these tortures did not 
deprive me of my life. 


1664 During adoration, Jesus said to me, My daughter, know that your ardent love and the 
compassion you have for Me were a consolation to Me in the Garden [of Olives]. 

1665 During Holy Hour in the evening, I heard the words, You see My mercy for sinners, 
which at this moment is revealing itself in all its power. See how little you have 
written about it; it is only a single drop. Do what is in your power, so that sinners 
may come to know My goodness. 

1666 Good Friday [April 15, 1938]. I saw the Lord Jesus, tortured, but not nailed to the Cross. It 
was still before the crucifixion, and He said to me, You are My Heart. Speak to sinners

about My mercy. And the Lord gave me interior knowledge of the whole abyss of His 
mercy for souls, and I learned that that which I had written is truly a drop. 

1667 Holy Saturday [April 16, 1938]. During adoration, the Lord said to me, Be at peace. My 
daughter. This Work of mercy is Mine; there is nothing of you in it. It pleases Me 
that you are carrying out faithfully what I have commanded you to do, not adding 
or taking away a single word. And He gave me an interior light by which I learned that 
not a single word was mine; despite difficulties and adversities, I have always, always, 
fulfilled His will, as He has made it known to me. 

1668 The Resurrection. Before the Mass of the Resurrection, I felt so weak that I lost all hope of 
participating in the procession which takes place in the church; and I said to the Lord, 
"Jesus, if my prayers are pleasing to You, give me the strength for this moment that I may 
take part in the procession." At that same instant, I felt strong and certain that I could go 
along with the sisters in the procession. 

1669 When the procession began, I saw J esus in a brightness greater than the light of the sun. 
Jesus looked at me with love and said, Heart of My Heart, be filled with joy. At that 
moment my spirit was drowned in Him... When I came to myself, I was walking along in the 
procession with the sisters, while my soul was totally immersed in Him... 

1670 + Easter [April 17, 1938]. During Mass, I thanked the Lord Jesus for having deigned to 
redeem us and for having given us that greatest of all gifts; namely, His love in Holy 
Communion; that is, His very own Self. At that moment, I was drawn into the bosom of the 
Most Holy Trinity, and I was immersed in the love of the Father, the Son and the Holy 
Spirit. These moments are hard to describe. 

1671 At that moment, I prayed to the Lord for a certain person, and the Lord answered me, This 
soul is particularly dear to Me. I was immensely happy with this. The happiness of other 
souls fills me with a new joy, and when I see the higher gifts in some soul, my heart soars 
up to the Lord in a new hymn of adoration. 

1672 April 19, [1938]. During recreation, one of the sisters [Sister Cajetan] said, "Sister Faustina 
is doing so poorly that she can hardly walk, but may she die soon because she is going to 
be a saint." Then one of the sister directresses [Sister Casimir 246] said, "That she is going 
to die, we know; but whether she is going to be a saint, that is another question." There 
then began some malicious remarks on this subject. I kept silent; then I put in a word, but 

I saw that the conversation was getting worse, so again I fell silent. 


1673 At present, I am getting letters from sisters who are in other houses and who made their 
novitiate with me. 247 They often amuse me and make me laugh, as they usually go 
something like this: "Dear Sister Faustina, we are very sorry that you are so gravely ill; but 
we are very happy that, when the Lord Jesus takes you away, you will pray for us, for you 
have a lot of influence with the Lord. "One of the sisters put it this way: "When you die, 
Sister, please take me under your special care, for certainly you can do that for me." 
Another sister wrote as follows: "How I am waiting for the time when the Lord Jesus will 
take you, because I know what will happen then; and I greatly desire death for you." I did 
want to ask her what she was thinking of, concerning my death, but I mortified myself and 
answered, "The same thing will happen to me, a sinner, as happens to all sinners, if God's 
mercy does not shield me." 

1674 April 20, [1938]. Departure for Pradnik. I was very worried that I would be put in bed in a 
ward and be exposed to all sorts of things. If it were to be for only a week or two... but it is 
for such a long time, two months or perhaps more. In the evening, I went in for a long talk 
with the Lord J esus. When I saw the Lord J esus, I poured out my whole heart before Him, 
all my troubles, fears and apprehensions. Jesus lovingly listened to me and then said, Be at 
peace. My child, I am with you. Go in great peace. All is ready; I have ordered, in 
My own special way, a private room to be prepared for you. Reassured and 
overwhelmed with gratitude, I went to bed. 

1675 On the following day, Sister Felicia took me there. I left in great peace and a calm spirit. 
When we arrived, they told us there was a private room for Sister Faustina. When we

entered the room, we were surprised that everything had been prepared so beautifully: all 
was clean and neat, covered with tablecloths and bedecked with flowers; a pretty Easter 
Lamb had been placed on the night table by the Sisters. 248 At once, three Sacred Heart 
Sisters 249 who work at the sanatorium, my old acquaintances, came and greeted me 
warmly. Sister Felicia was surprised at all this. We bid a warm farewell to each other, and 
she left. When I was alone, with just the Lord J esus and myself, I thanked Him for this 
great grace. 

1676 Jesus said to me, Be at peace; I am with you. Tired, I fell asleep. In the evening, the sister 
[Sister David] who was to look after me came and said, "Tomorrow you will not receive the 
Lord J esus, Sister, because you are very tired; later on, we shall see. " This hurt me very 
much, but I said with great calmness, "Very well," and, resigning myself totally to the will of 
the Lord, I tried to sleep. In the morning, I made my meditation and prepared for Holy 
Communion, even though I was not to receive the Lord Jesus. When my love and desire had 
reached a high degree, I saw at my bedside a Seraph, who gave me Holy Communion, 250 
saying these words: "Behold the Lord of Angels." When I received the Lord, my spirit was 
drowned in the love of God and in amazement. This was repeated for thirteen days, 
although I was never sure he would bring me Holy Communion the next day. Yet, I put my 
trust completely in the goodness of God, but did not even dare to think that I would receive 
Holy Communion in this way on the following day. 

The Seraph was surrounded by a great light, the divinity and love of God being reflected in 
him. He wore a golden robe and, over it, a transparent surplice and a transparent stole. The 
chalice was crystal, covered with a transparent veil. As soon as he gave me the Lord, he 
disappeared. 


1677 Once, when a certain doubt rose within me shortly before Holy Communion, the Seraph 
with the Lord Jesus stood before me again. I asked the Lord Jesus, and not receiving an 
answer, I said to the Seraph, "Could you perhaps hear my confession?" And he answered 
me, "No spirit in heaven has that power." And at that moment, the Sacred Host rested on 
my lips. 

1678 On Sunday [April 24, 1938 251 ], the sister who had charge of the sick said to me, "Well, 
Sister, the priest will bring you the Lord Jesus today." I answered, "Good," and he brought 
Him. After some time, I received permission to leave my bed. So I went to Holy Mass and to 
spend time with the Lord, regularly. 

1679 After the first examination, the doctor [Silberg] found that my condition was grave. "We 
suspect, Sister, that you do have the illness about which you spoke to me. But Almighty 
God can do all things." 

When I entered my room, I steeped myself in prayer of thanksgiving for everything the 
Lord had been sending me throughout my whole life, surrendering myself totally to His 
most holy will. A deep joy and peace flooded my soul. I felt a peace so great that, if death 
had come at that moment, I would not have said to it, "Wait, for I still have some matters 
to attend to." No, I would have welcomed it with joy, because I am ready for the meeting 
with the Lord, not only today, but ever since the moment when I placed my complete trust 
in the Divine Mercy, resigning myself totally to His most holy will, full of mercy and 
compassion. I know what I am of myself... 

1680 Low Sunday. Today, I again offered myself to the Lord as a holocaust for sinners. My J esus, 
if the end of my life is already approaching, I beg You most humbly, accept my death in 
union with You as a holocaust which I offer You today, while I still have full possession of 
my faculties and a fully conscious will, and this for a threefold purpose: 

Firstly: that the work of Your mercy may spread throughout the whole world and that the 
Feast of The Divine Mercy may be solemnly promulgated and celebrated. 

Secondly: that sinners, especially dying sinners, may have recourse to Your mercy and 
experience the unspeakable effects of this mercy. 

Thirdly: that all the work of Your mercy may be realized according to Your wishes, and for a 
certain person who is in charge of this work... 

Accept, most merciful Jesus, this, my inadequate sacrifice, which I offer to You today before 
heaven and earth. May Your Most Sacred Heart, so full of mercy, complete what is lacking

in my offering, and offer it to Your Father for the conversion of sinners. I thirst after souls, 

0 Christ. 

1681 + At that moment, the light of God penetrated my being, and I felt that I was God's 
exclusive property; and I experienced the greatest spiritual freedom, of which I had had no 
previous idea. And at the same time, I saw the glory of The Divine Mercy and an infinite 
multitude of souls who were praising His goodness. My soul was completely drowned in 
God, and I heard the words, You are My well-beloved daughter. The vivid presence of 
God continued throughout the whole day. 


1682 + May 1, [1938]. This evening, Jesus said to me, My daughter, do you need anything? I 
answered, "0 my Love, when I have You I have everything." And the Lord answered, If 

souls would put themselves completely in My care, I Myself would undertake the 
task of sanctifying them, and I would lavish even greater graces on them. There 
are souls who thwart My efforts, but I have not given up on them; as often as they 
turn to Me, I hurry to their aid, shielding them with My mercy, and I give them the 
first place in My compassionate Heart. 

1683 Write for the benefit of religious souls that it delights Me to come to their hearts in 
Holy Communion. But if there is anyone else in such a heart, I cannot bear it and 
quickly leave that heart, taking with Me all the gifts and graces I have prepared 
for the soul. And the soul does not even notice My going. After some time, inner 
emptiness and dissatisfaction will come to her attention. Oh, if only she would 
turn to Me then, I would help her to cleanse her heart, and I would fulfill 
everything in her soul; but without her knowledge and consent, I cannot be the 
Master of her heart. 

1684 + I often communicate with persons who are dying and obtain the divine mercy for them. 
Oh, how great is the goodness of God, greater than we can understand. There are moments 
and there are mysteries of the divine mercy over which the heavens are astounded. Let our 
judgment of souls cease, for God's mercy upon them is extraordinary. 

1685 During Holy Hour today, I asked the Lord Jesus if He would deign to teach me about the 
spiritual life. Jesus answered me, My daughter, faithfully live up to the words which I 
speak to you. Do not value any external thing too highly, even if it were to seem 
very precious to you. Let go of yourself, and abide with Me continually. Entrust 
everything to Me and do nothing on your own, and you will always have great 
freedom of spirit. No circumstances or events will ever be able to upset you. Set 
little store on what people say. Let everyone judge you as they like. Do not make 
excuses for yourself; it will do you no harm. Give away everything at the first sign 
of a demand, even if they were the most necessary things. Do not ask for anything 
without consulting Me. Allow them to take away even what is due you-respect, 
your good name-let your spirit rise above ail that. And so, set free from 
everything, rest close to My Heart, not allowing your peace to be disturbed by 
anything. My pupil, consider the words which I have spoken to you. 

1686 0 my Love, my eternal Master, how good it is to obey; because when obedience infuses the 
soul, it brings with it power and strength to act. 

1687 Today I saw the Crucified Lord Jesus. Precious pearls and diamonds were pouring forth from 
the wound in His Heart. I saw how a multitude of souls was gathering these gifts, but there 
was one soul who was closest to His Heart and she, knowing the greatness of these gifts, 
was gathering them with liberality, not only for herself, but for others as well. The Savior 
said to me, Behold, the treasures of grace that flow down upon souls, but not all 
souls know how to take advantage of My generosity. 

1688 Today, the Lord said to me, My daughter, look into My Merciful Heart and reflect its 
compassion in your own heart and in your deeds, so that you, who proclaim My 
mercy to the world, may yourself be aflame with it. 



1689 May 8, [1938]. Today, I saw two enormous pillars implanted in the ground; I had implanted 
one of them, and a certain person, S.M., the other. We had done so with unheard-of effort, 
much fatigue and difficulty. And when I had implanted the pillar, I myself wondered where 
such extraordinary strength had come from. And I recognized that I had not done this by 
my own strength, but with the power which came from above. These two pillars were close

to each other, in the area of the image. And I saw the image, raised up very high and 
hanging from these two pillars. In an instant, there stood a large temple, supported both 
from within and from without, upon these two pillars. I saw a hand finishing the temple, but 
I did not see the person. There was a great multitude of people, inside and outside the 
temple, and the torrents issuing from the Compassionate Heart of Jesus were flowing down 
upon everyone. 

1690 After Holy Communion today, Jesus said, My daughter give Me souls. Know that it is 
your mission to win souls for Me by prayer and sacrifice, and by encouraging them 
to trust in My mercy. 

1691 Oh, how greatly I desire the glory of Your mercy-for me, bitterness and suffering! When I 
seethe glory of Your mercy, I am immeasurably happy. Let all disgrace, humiliation and 
abasement come down upon me, as long as the glory and praise of Your mercy resounds 
everywhere- that's all that matters. 

The Creator and The Creature. 

1692 I adore You, Lord and Creator, hidden in the Blessed Sacrament. I adore You for all the 
works of Your hands, that reveal to me so much wisdom, goodness and mercy, 0 Lord. You 
have spread so much beauty over the earth, and it tells me about Your beauty, even though 
these beautiful things are but a faint reflection of You, Incomprehensible Beauty. And 
although You have hidden Yourself and concealed Your beauty, my eye, enlightened by 
faith, reaches You, and my soul recognizes its Creator, its Highest Good; and my heart is 
completely immersed in prayer of adoration. 

My Lord and Creator, Your goodness encourages me to converse with You. Your mercy 
abolishes the chasm which separates the Creator from the creature. To converse with You, 

0 Lord, is the delight of my heart. In You I find everything that my heart could desire. Here 
Your light illumines my mind, enabling it to know You more and more deeply. Here streams 
of graces flow down upon my heart. Here my soul draws eternal life. O my Lord and 
Creator, You alone, beyond all these gifts, give Your own self to me and unite Yourself 
intimately with Your miserable creature. Here, without searching for words, our hearts 
understand each other. Here, no one is able to interrupt our conversation. What I talk to 
You about, Jesus, is our secret, which creatures shall not know and Angels dare not ask 
about. These are secret acts of forgiveness, known only to J esus and me; this is the 
mystery of His mercy, which embraces each soul separately. For this incomprehensible 
goodness of Yours, I adore You, O Lord and Creator, with all my heart and all my soul. And, 
although my worship is so little and poor, I am at peace because I know that You know it is 
sincere, however inadequate... 



1693 As I was writing the above words, I saw the Lord J esus leaning over me, and He asked, My 
daughter, what are you writing? I answered, "I am writing about You, J esus, about Your 
being hidden in the Blessed Sacrament, about Your inconceivable love and mercy for 
people." And Jesus said, Secretary of My most profound mystery, know that yours is 
an exclusive intimacy with Me. Your task is to write down everything that I make 
known to you about My mercy, for the benefit of those who by reading these 
things will be comforted in their souls and will have the courage to approach Me. I 
therefore want you to devote all your free moments to writing. "But, 0 Lord, shall I 
always have a moment, at least a brief one, in which to write?" And Jesus answered, It is 
not for you to think about that. Only do as much as you can, and I will always 
arrange things so that you will easily be able to do what I ask of you... 

1694 Today, I was visited by a certain lay person [probably Stanislava Kwietniewska] who has 
caused me a lot of sorrow and who has abused my goodness, telling many lies. At the first 
moment I saw her, the blood froze in my veins, because there stood before my eyes all that 
I had to suffer because of her, although with one word I could have freed myself of them 
all. And the thought came to me to tell her the truth, firmly and immediately. But at the 
same moment, the mercy of God came before my eyes, and I resolved to act toward her as 
Jesus would have acted in my place. I started to talk to her gently, and when she expressed 
the wish to talk to me alone; I then, in a very delicate manner, made known to her clearly

the sad condition of her soul. I saw that she was deeply moved, though she was trying to 
hide this from me. At that point, a third person came in, and so our heart-to-heart talk 
came to an end. She asked me for a glass of water and for two other things which I did 
willingly. However, had it not been for the grace of God, I would not have been able to act 
in such a way toward her. When they left, I thanked God for the grace which had supported 
me during that time. 

1695 Then I heard the words, I am glad you behaved like My true daughter. Be always 
merciful as I am merciful. Love everyone out of love for Me, even your greatest 
enemies, so that My mercy may be fully reflected in your heart. 

1696 O Christ, although much effort is required, all things can be done with Your grace. 

1697 I was feeling fairly well today, and I was glad that I would be able to make the Holy Hour. 
But when I began to make the Holy Hour, my physical sufferings intensified, so that I was 
not able to pray. When the Holy Hour was over, my sufferings came to an end, and I 
complained to the Lord that I had wanted