 Renewal of Vows. 

1781 I got up how much earlier than usual and went to the chapel, steeping myself in the love of 
God. Before receiving Holy Communion, I silently renewed my religious vows. After Holy 
Communion, the infinite love of God swept over me. My soul was in communion with the 
Holy Spirit, who is the same Lord as the Father and the Son. His breath filled my soul with 
such delight that it would be useless for me to try to give even a faint idea of what my heart 
experienced. Throughout the whole day, wherever I was and regardless of with whom I 
talked, a vivid presence of God accompanied me; my soul was drowned in thanksgiving for 
these great graces. 

1782 + When I went out to the garden today, the Lord said to me, Return to your room, for I 
will be waiting for you there. As soon as I returned, I saw the Lord Jesus, sitting at the 
table and waiting for me. He looked at me kindly and said, My daughter, I want you to 
write now, because that walk would not have been in conformity with My will. I 
remained alone and immediately got down to writing. 

1783 + When I immersed myself in prayer and united myself with all the Masses that were being 
celebrated all over the world at that time, I implored God, for the sake of all these Holy 
Masses, to have mercy on the world and especially on poor sinners who were dying at that 
moment. At the same instant, I received an interior answer from God that a thousand souls 
had received grace through the prayerful mediation I had offered to God. We do not know 
the number of souls that is ours to save through our prayers and sacrifices; therefore, let us 
always pray for sinners. 

1784 Today, in the course of a long conversation, the Lord said to me, How very much I desire 
the salvation of souls! My dearest secretary, write that I want to pour out My 
divine life into human souls and sanctify them, if only they were willing to accept 
My grace. The greatest sinners would achieve great sanctity, if only they would 
trust in My mercy. The very inner depths of My being are filled to overflowing with 
mercy, and it is being poured out upon all I have created. My delight is to act in a 
human soul and to fill it with My mercy and to justify it. My kingdom on earth is My 
life in the human soul. Write, My secretary, that I Myself am the spiritual guide of 
souls-and I guide them indirectly through the priest, and lead each one to sanctity 
by a road known to Me alone. 

1785 Mother Superior [Irene] visited me today, but only for a short while. When she looked 
around, she said that everything was too pretty here. It is true, the sisters are trying to 
make my stay in the sanatorium pleasant. But all this beauty does not lessen my sacrifice, 
which God alone can see and which will cease only when my heart stops beating. Neither 
the beauty of the whole earth, nor even of heaven itself, can blur the torture of my soul, 
which is real at each moment though so deeply interior. It will end when You Yourself, 
Author of my suffering, say, "Enough." There is nothing that could lessen my sacrifice. 


First Friday after Corpus Christi. [June 17, 1938] 



1786 Right away, on the Friday after Corpus Christi, I felt so unwell that I thought the longed-for 
moment was approaching. I had a high fever and spat up much blood during the night. Yet, 

I did go to receive the Lord J esus in the morning, but I could not stay for the Holy Mass. I n

the afternoon, my temperature dropped suddenly to 35.8° C. I felt so weak that it was as if 
everything inside me were dying. But when I steeped myself in profound prayer, I 
understood that it was not yet the moment of deliverance, but only a closer call from my 
Bridegroom. 

1787 When I met with the Lord, I said to Him, "You are fooling me, Jesus; You show me the open 
gate of heaven, and again You leave me on earth." The Lord said to me, When, in heaven, 
you see these present days, you will rejoice and will want to see as many of them 
as possible. I am not surprised. My daughter, that you cannot understand this 
now, because your heart is overflowing with pain and longing for Me. Your 
vigilance pleases Me. Let My word be enough for you; it will not be long now. 

And my soul found itself once again in exile. I lovingly united myself to the will of God, 
submitting myself to His gracious decrees. 

1788 + The conversations that I hear in this place about worldly matters make me so tired that I 
nearly faint. The sisters who nurse me have noticed this, because it shows outwardly. 

1789 + Today 253 I saw the glory of God which flows from the image. Many souls are receiving 
graces, although they do not speak of it openly. Even though it has met up with all sorts of 
vicissitudes, God is receiving glory because of it; and the efforts of Satan and of evil men 
are shattered and come to naught. In spite of Satan's anger, The Divine Mercy will triumph 
over the whole world and will be worshiped by all souls. 

1790 I have come to know that, in order for God to act in a soul, it must give up acting on its 
own; otherwise, God will not carry out His will in it. 

1791 When a great storm was approaching, I began to say the chaplet. Suddenly I heard the 
voice of an angel: "I cannot approach in this storm, because the light which comes from her 
mouth drives back both me and the storm." Such was the angel's complaint to God. I then 
recognized how much havoc he was to have made through this storm; but I also recognized 
that this prayer was pleasing to God, and that this chaplet was most powerful. 

1792 I learned that a certain soul was very pleasing to God and that, in spite of all sorts of 
persecutions, God was clothing this person in a new and higher dignity. My heart greatly 
rejoiced in this. 

1793 The moments which are most pleasant to me are those when I converse with the Lord 
within the center of my being. I try my very best not to leave Him alone. He likes to be 
always with us... 

1794 + 0 J esus, eternal God, thank You for Your countless graces and blessings. Let every beat 
of my heart be a new hymn of thanksgiving to You, 0 God. Let every drop of my blood 
circulate for You, Lord. My soul is one hymn in adoration of Your mercy. I love You, God, for 
Yourself alone. 


1795 My God, although my sufferings are great and protracted, I accept them from Your hands as 
magnificent gifts. I accept them all, even the ones that other souls have refused to accept. 
You can come to me with everything, my J esus; I will refuse You nothing. I ask You for only 
one thing: give me the strength to endure them and grant that they may be meritorious. 
Here is my whole being; do with me as You please. 

1796 Today, 2M I saw the Sacred Heart of J esus in the sky, in the midst of a great brilliance. The 
rays were issuing from the Wound [in His side] and spreading out over the entire world. 

1797 Today, the Lord came to me and said, My daughter, help Me to save souls. You will go 
to a dying sinner, and you will continue to recite the chaplet, and in this way you 
will obtain for him trust in My mercy, for he is already in despair. 

1798 Suddenly, I found myself in a strange cottage where an elderly man was dying amidst great 
torments. All about the bed was a multitude of demons and the family, who were crying. 
When I began to pray, the spirits of darkness fled, with hissing and threats directed at me. 
The soul became calm and, filled with trust, rested in the Lord. 

At the same moment, I found myself again in my own room. How this happens... I do not 
know. 

+ 

1799 J . M.J . I feel that there is a power which is defending me and protecting me from the blows 
of the enemy. It guards and defends me. I feel it very distinctly; it is as if I am being 
shielded by the shadow of His wings. 

1800 My J esus, You alone are good. Even if my heart were to make every effort to write of Your

goodness, at least in part, I could not do so-this is beyond all our comprehension. 

1801 One day during Holy Mass, the Lord gave me a deeper knowledge of His holiness and His 
majesty, and at the same time I saw my own misery. This knowledge made me happy, and 
my soul drowned itself completely in His mercy. I felt enormously happy. 

1802 On the following day, I had a clear awareness of the following words: "You see, God is so 
holy, and you are sinful. Do not approach Him, and go to Confession every day." And 
indeed, whatever I thought of seemed to me to be a sin. But I did not omit going to Holy 
Communion, and I resolved to go to Confession at the prescribed time, as I had no clear 
impediment. But when the day for confession came, I prepared a whole mass of those sins 
of which I was to accuse myself. However, in the confessional, God allowed me to accuse 
myself of only two imperfections, despite my efforts to make a confession according to what 
I had prepared. When I left the confessional, the Lord said to me, My daughter, all those 
sins you intended to confess are not sins in My eyes; that is why I took away your 
ability to tell them. I understood that Satan, wanting to disturb my peace, has been 
giving me exaggerated thoughts. 0 Savior, how great is Your goodness! 


1803 One day, when I was preparing for Holy Communion and noticed that I had nothing to offer 
Him, I fell at His feet, calling down all His mercy upon my poor soul: "May Your grace, 
which flows down upon me from Your Compassionate Heart, strengthen me for the struggle 
and sufferings, that I may remain faithful to You. And, although I am such misery, I do not 
fear You, because I know Your mercy well. Nothing will frighten me away from You, 0 God, 
because everything is so much less than what I know [Your mercy to be]- 1 see that clearly. 

[Here ends the sixth and last notebook] 


Notebook I: 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-52] 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1 001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231- 1 321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401-1450 t 145 1 -1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Preparation for Holy Communion 


1804 + J .M.J . Cracow, J anuary 10, 1938 

My Preparation for Holy Communion 

Sister Mary Faustina of the Blessed Sacrament 
Congregation of the Sisters of Our Lady of Mercy 

The most solemn moment of my life is the moment when I receive Holy Communion. I long 
for each Holy Communion, and for every Holy Communion I give thanks to the Most Holy 
Trinity. 

If the angels were capable of envy, they would envy u for two things: one is the receiving of 
Holy Communion and the other is suffering. 

1805 1. + Today, I am preparing myself for Your coming as bride does for the coming of her 
bridegroom. He is great Lord, this Bridegroom of mine. The heaven cannot contain Him. The 
Seraphim who stand closest to Him cover their faces and repeat unceasingly: Holy Holy, 
Holy. 

This great Lord is my Bridegroom. It is to Him that the Choirs sing. It is before Him that the 
Thrones bow down. By His splendor the sun is eclipsed. And yet this great Lord is my 
Bridegroom. My heart, desist from this profound meditation on how others adore Him, for 
you no longer have time for that, as He is coming and il already at your door. 

1806 I go out to meet Him, and I invite Him to the dwelling place of my heart, humbling myself 
profoundly before His majesty. But the Lord lifts me up from the dust and invites me, as His 
bride, to sit next to Him and to tell Him everything that is on my heart. And 1, set at east 
by His kindness, lean my head on His breast and tell Him of everything. In the first place, I 
tell Him things would never tell to any creature. And then, I speak about the needs of the 
Church, about the souls of poor sinners and about how much they have need of His mercy.

But the time passes quickly. Jesus, I must go t carry out the duties that are awaiting me. 
Jesus tells me that there is still a moment in which to say farewell, deep mutual gaze, and 
we seemingly separate for while; but, in reality, we never do. Our hearts are constantly 
united. Though outwardly I am distracted b my various duties, the presence of Jesus 
plunges me constantly in profound recollection. 



1807 2. + Today, my preparation for the coming of Jesus is brief, but imprinted deeply with 
vehement love. The presence of God penetrates me and sets aflame my love for Him. There 
are no words; there is only interior understanding. I drown completely in God, through love. 
The Lord approaches the dwelling of my heart. After receiving Communion, I have just 
enough presence of mind to return to my kneeler. At the same time, my soul is completely 
lost in God, and I no longer know what is going on about me. God gives me an interior 
knowledge of His Divine Being. These moments are short, but penetrating. The soul leaves 
the chapel in profound recollection, and it is not easy to distract it. At such times, I touch 
the ground with only one foot, as it were. No sacrifice throughout such a day is either 
difficult or burdensome. Every situation evokes a new act of love. 

1808 3. + Today, I invite Jesus to my heart, as Love. You are Love itself. All heaven catches the 
flame from You and is filled with love. And so my soul covets You as a flower yearns for the 
sun. J esus, hasten to my heart, for You see that, as the flower is eager for the sun, so my 
heart is for You. I open the calyx of my heart to receive Your love. 

1809 When Jesus came to my heart, everything in my soul trembled with life and with warmth. 
Jesus, take the love from my heart and pour into it Your love, Your love which is burning 
and radiant, which knows how to bear each sacrifice, which knows how to forget itself 
completely. 

Today, my day is marked by sacrifice... 

1810 4. + Today, I Prepare for the Coming of the King. 

What am I, and who are You, 0 Lord, King of eternal glory? 0 my heart, are you aware of 
who is coming to you today? Yes, I know, but - strangely - I am not able to grasp it. Oh, if 
He were just a king, but He is the King of kings, the Lord of lords. Before Him, all power and 
dominion tremble. He is coming to my heart today. But I hear Him approaching. I go out to 
meet Him and invite Him. When He entered the dwelling of my heart, it was filled with such 
reverence that it fainted with fear, falling at His feet. Jesus gives her His hand and 
graciously permits her to take her place beside Him. He reassures her, saying, See, I have 
left My heavenly throne to become united with you. What you see is just a tiny 
part and already your soul swoons with love. How amazed will your heart be when 
you see Me in all My glory. 

1811 But I want to tell you that eternal life must begin already , here on earth through 
Holy Communion. Each Holy Communion makes you more capable of communing 
with God throughout eternity. 

And so, my King, I do not ask You for anything, although I know that You can give me 
everything. I ask You for one thing only: remain forever the King of my heart; that is 
enough for me. 


1812 Today I am renewing my act of submission to my King, by faithfulness to interior 
inspirations. 



1813 5. + Today, I am not forcing myself to make any special preparation. I cannot think of 
anything, though I feel many things. I long for the time when God will come to my heart. I 
throw myself in His arms and tell Him about my inability and my misery. I pour out all the 
pain of my heart, for not being able to love Him as much as I want. I arouse within myself 
acts of faith, hope and charity and live on that throughout the day. 

1814 6. + Today, my preparation is brief. A strong and living faith nearly tears away the veil of 
love. The presence of God penetrates my heart as a ray from the sun penetrates crystal. At 
the moment when I receive God, all my being is steeped in Him. Amazement and 
admiration overwhelm me when I see God's great majesty, which stoops down to me who 
am misery itself. There bursts forth from my soul immense gratitude to Him for all the 
graces that He imparts to me, and especially for the grace of being called to His exclusive 
service. 

1815 7. + Today, in Holy Communion, I want to unite myself to J esus as closely as possible,

through love. I yearn for God so ardently that it seems to me that the moment will never 
come when the priest will give me Holy Communion. My soul falls as if into a swoon 
because of my longing for God. 

1816 When I received Him into my heart, the veil of faith was torn away. I saw J esus who said to 

me, My daughter, your love compensates Me for the coldness of many souls. After 
these words, I was once again alone, but throughout the whole day I lived in an act of 
reparation. 

1817 8. + Today, I feel an abyss of misery in my soul. I want to approach Holy Communion as a 
fountain of mercy and to drown myself completely in this ocean of love. 

When I received Jesus, I threw my self into Him as into an abyss of unfathomable mercy. 
And the more I felt I was misery itself, the stronger grew my trust in Him. 

In this abasement, I passed the whole day. 

1818 9. + Today, my soul has the disposition of a child. I unite myself to God as a child to its 
father. I feel completely like a child of God. 

1819 When I had received Holy Communion, I had a deeper knowledge of the heavenly Father 
and of His Fatherhood in relation to souls. 

Today I live, glorifying the Holy Trinity. I thank God that He has deigned to adopt us as His 
children, through grace. 

1820 10. + Today, I want to be transformed, whole and entire, into the love of Jesus and to offer 
myself, together with Him, to the Heavenly Father. 

During Holy Mass, I saw the Infant Jesus in the chalice, and He said to me, I am dwelling 
in your heart as you see Me in this chalice. 



1821 After Holy Communion, I felt the beating of the Heart of J esus in my own heart. Although I 
have been aware, for a long time, that Holy Communion continues in me until the next 
Communion, today - and throughout the whole day - I am adoring Jesus in my heart and 
asking Him, by His grace, to protect little children from the evil that threatens them. A vivid 
and even physically felt presence of God continues throughout the day and does not in the 
least interfere with my duties. 

1822 11. + Today, my soul desires to show, in a special way, its love to J esus. When the Lord 
entered my heart, I threw myself down at His feet like a rosebud. I want the fragrance of 
my love to rise continually to the foot of Your throne. You see, J esus, in this rosebud, all my 
heart [offered] to You, not only now when my heart is burning like a live coal, but also 
during the day, when I will give You proofs of my love by faithfulness to divine grace. 

Today, all the difficulties and sufferings that I will encounter, I will quickly seize, like 
rosebuds, to throw at the feet of Jesus. Little matter that the hand, or rather the heart, 
bleeds... 

1823 12. + Today, my soul is preparing for the coming of my Savior, who is goodness and love 
itself. Temptations and distractions torment me and do not let me prepare for the coming of 
the Lord. Therefore I desire even more ardently to receive You, Lord, because I know that 
when You come, You will rescue me from these torments. And if it is Your will that I should 
suffer, well then, fortify me for the struggle. 

Jesus, Savior, who have deigned to come into my heart, drive away these distractions which 
are keeping me from talking to You. 

Jesus answered me, I want you to become like a knight experienced in battle, who 
can give orders to others amid the exploding shells. I n the same way. My child, 
you should know how to master yourself amid the greatest difficulties, and let 
nothing drive you away from Me, not even your falls. 

Today, I have been struggling all day long with a certain difficulty about which You, Jesus, 
know. . . 

1824 13. + Today, my heart trembles with joy. I desire very much that J esus come to my heart. 
My longing heart is inflamed with an ever-increasing love. 

When J esus came, I threw myself into His arms like a little child. I told Him of my joy. J esus 
listened to these outpourings of my love. When I asked pardon of Jesus for not preparing 
myself for Holy Communion, but for continually thinking of sharing in this joy as soon as 
possible, He answered that Most pleasing to Me is this preparation with which you 
have received Me into your heart. Today, in a special way I bless this your joy. 
Nothing will disturb that joy throughout this day... 

1825 14. + Today, my soul is preparing for the coming of the Lord, who can do all things, who

can make me perfect and holy. I am preparing very carefully for His reception, but there 
arose the difficulty as to how to present this to Him? I rejected it [this difficulty] at once. I 
will present it as my heart dictates. 



1826 When I had received J esus in Holy Communion, my heart cried out with all its might, 

"Jesus, transform me into another host! I want to be a living host for You. You are a great 
and all-powerful Lord; You can grant me this favor." And the Lord answered me, You are a 

living host, pleasing to the Heavenly Father. But reflect: What is a host? A 
sacrifice. And so...? 

0 my J esus, I understand the meaning of "host," the meaning of sacrifice. I desire to be 
before Your Majesty a living host; that is, a living sacrifice that daily burns in Your honor. 

When my strength begins to fail, it is Holy Communion that will sustain me and give me 
strength. Indeed, I fear the day on which I would not receive Holy Communion. My soul 
draws astonishing strength from Holy Communion. 

0 living Host, light of my soul! 

1827 15. + Today, my soul is preparing for Holy Communion as for a wedding feast, wherein all 
the participants are resplendent with unspeakable beauty. And I, too, have been invited to 
this banquet, but I do not see that beauty within myself, only an abyss of misery. And, 
although I do not feel worthy of sitting down to table, I will however slip under the table, at 
the feet of J esus, and will beg for the crumbs that fall from the table. Knowing Your mercy, 

1 therefore approach You, Jesus, for sooner will I run out of misery than will the compassion 
of Your Heart exhaust itself. That is why during this day I will keep arousing trust in The 
Divine Mercy. 

1828 16. + Today, the Majesty of God is surrounding me. There is no way that I can help myself 
to prepare better. I am thoroughly enwrapped in God. My soul is being inflamed by His love. 
I only know that I love and am loved. That is enough for me. I am trying my best to be 
faithful throughout the day to the Holy Spirit and to fulfill His demands. I am trying my best 
for interior silence in order to be able to hear His voice... 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-521 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

80 -850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1 201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-1321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t L751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804- 1 828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Footnotes 


[1] On February 22, 1931, while staying in Plock, Sister Faustina received Jesus' order to paint 
a picture according to a model that was shown to her (cf. Diary 47) 

The Servant of God tried to fulfill the command, but not knowing painting techniques, she 
was unable to do it by herself. Still, she did not give up the idea. She kept returning to it 
and sought help from other sisters and from her confessors. 

A few years later her superiors sent her to Vilnius (Wilno), where her confessor, Rev. Prof. 
Michael Sopocko, interested to see what the picture of a hitherto unknown theme would 
look like, asked the painter Eugene Kazimierowski to paint the picture according to Sister 
Faustina's directions. The picture was finished in J une 1934 and hung in the corridor of the 
Bernardine Sisters' convent near St. Michael's Church in Vilnius, where Father Sopocko was 
rector. 

I n 1935, during the celebrations concluding the J ubilee Year of the Redemption of the 
World, the image of The Divine Mercy was transferred to the Ostra Brama ["Eastern Gate" 
to the city of Vilnius] and placed in a high window so that it could be seen from far away. It 
was there from April 26 to April 28. By permission of Archbishop Romuald J albrzykowski, 
on April 4, 1937, the image was blessed and placed in the St. Michael's Church in Vilnius. 

I n 1944, a committee of experts was formed, at the order of Archbishop J albrzykowski, to 
evaluate the image. The experts' opinion was the the image of The Divine Mercy, painted

by E. Kazimierowski was artistically executed and an important contribution to 
contemporary religious art. 

There are several characteristic features of this original image. Against a plain background, 
Christ is shown walking, with a narrow halo around His head, and his eyes slightly 
downcast, as if he were looking from above at the spectators. His right hand is raised in a 
gesture of blessing; while his left hand is opening the robe at His Heart (not shown), from 
which two rays of light issue, a pale one to the viewer's right, a red one to the left. The 
light of these rays shines through the hands and the robe. 

In 1943, in Lwow, at the request of the Sisters of Our Lady of Mercy, Stanley Batowski 
painted another image, which was placed in a aside altar of the community chapel at No. 
3/9 Zytnia street in Warsaw. During the Warsaw uprising, this chapel (and with it the 
image) was burned. 

Batowski's image was very much liked by everyone. Encouraged by this, the Superior 
General of the Community of the Sisters of Our Lady of Mercy asked Batowski to paint 
another one for the house in Cracow, where the new form of devotion to The Divine Mercy 
was already expanding. The image was painted and sent to Cracow on October 6, 1943. 

I n the meantime, the superior of the Cracow house had been approached by the painter 
Adolf Hyla, who offered to paint some sort of picture for the sisters' chapel as a votive 
offering for having survived the war. The superior, Mother Irene Krzyzanowska, after 
consulting with the senior sisters and Father Andrasz, S.J ., suggested that Mr. Hyla should 
paint the image according to Sister Faustina's directions. For that purpose, he was given 
the description (taken from Sister Faustina's Diary) along with a small copy of the image 
painted by Eugene Kazimierowski. 



The image was finished in Autumn of 1943 and brought to the Cracow house. Batowski's 
image arrived at the same time. For this reason a problem arose - which of the images 
should be kept n the sisters' chapel? It was settled by Cardinal Sapieha, who by chance 
happened to be present there. He inspected the two pictures and said, "Since Hyla has 
painted his picture as a votive offering, that picture should stay in the sisters' chapel." He 
blessed the picture and ordered that it be hung. To this day the picture remains in the side 
altar to the left of the main entrance, in the Chapel of the Congregation of the Sisters of 
Our Lady of Mercy at No. 3/9 Wronia Street in Cracow, and is held in reverence as the 
image painted under the direction of Sister Faustina Kowalska. People from all over Poland 
and from abroad come to this image of the Merciful Christ to beg for needed graces. There 
are many votive offerings, and copies of the image are found all over the world. 

S. Batowski's picture was placed in the Church of the Divine Mercy at Smolensk Street in 
Cracow. 

Over the years, many other painters have painted images of The Divine Mercy, based on 
either existing representations or on Sister Faustina's diary. 

[2] That is; in the picture. 

[3] During her stay in Vilnius, Sister Faustina was told by her confessor, Father Michael 
Sopocko, to write down her interior experiences. 

When asked by someone in the Congregation why Sister Faustina had been writing a diary, 
Father Sopocko answered: "I was a professor at the Seminary and at the School of 
Theology of the Stefan Batory University in Vilnius at the time. I had no time to listen to 
her lengthy confessions at the confessional, so I told her to write everything down and 
then to show it to me from time to time. This is how the Diary came into being" (Father 
Sopocko's letter of March 6, 1972). 

Sister Faustina mentions the confessor's order in numbers 6 and 839 of the Diary. 

In addition to this order from her confessor, the Servant of God mentions, on many pages 
of her diary, a distinct command to write, given her by the Lord Jesus Himself (see diary 
nos. 372, 459, 895, 965, 1142, 1457, 1567, 1665, and others). 

[4] Aldona Lipszycowa then lived in Ostrowek in the district of Radzymin. She was born on April 
14, 1896 in Tbilisi, USSR, the daughter of Serafin J astrzebski and Mary Lemke. In 1965/66 
she was one of the witnesses in the informative process of the Servant of God. 

"My husband," she recalls, "Had asked the pastor of St. James Parish in the suburb of 
Ochota, to find someone to help me in my housework. Rev. Canon James Dabrowski, when

pastor in Klebow, became my husband's friend. He baptized him, blessed our marriage and 
baptized all our children. Then Rev. Canon sent us - in the summer of 1924 - Helen 
Kowalski with a note that he did not know her, but hoped she would be all right" (A. SF. 
Recol.). 

[5] The Convent of the Congregation of the Sisters of Our Lady of Mercy at No. 3/9 Zytnia 
Street in Warsaw. 



[6] Mother Michael - Olga Moraczewska was born in 1873. She was considered highly educated 
for those times. She spoke several languages and completed the Conservatory of Music. 

She entered the congregation later in life. After making her final profession of vows, she 
was appointed superior fo the house in Warsaw. She kept this position until 1928. After the 
term of office of the Superior General M. Leonard Cielecka, she administrated the entire 
Congregation. During her administration as Superior General, the Constitutions of the 
Congregations received approbation. She dearly loved her community and sought its 
spiritual and material development. She founded new homes in Warsaw in the suburb of 
Grochow, in Rabka, in Lwow, and in Biala, a house affiliated to the house in Plock, 10 km 
away. 

She died in Cracow November 15, 1966, and is buried in the Congregation's cemetery (A. 
SMDM-C) . 

[7] It is a Community tradition that sisters stay under the same roof with the Lord J esus in the 
Eucharist. Since the chapel at the Warsaw house was in a separate building a few meters 
from the sisters' house, a second chapel was made on the second floor of the sisters' 
convent. By permission of the Archbishop's Curia, the Blessed Sacrament was kept there 
and, in accord with church law, on certain days the Holy Mass was said. The chapel was 
commonly referred to as the "Little Chapel" or "The Little J esus." 

[8] According to the Congregation's custom, canonical silence was observed from 9:00 p.m. 
Private prayers could be recited silently. Most likely the Servant of God thought that 
praying prostrate on the floor, not the prayer itself, offended this custom. 

[9] 9. The "superiors" could be the superior general and the directress of the postulants, for 
they decided whether the Servant of God would be admitted to the reception of the habit 
and so to the novitiate in Cracow. 

The superior general at the time was Mother Leonard Cielecka, born December 24, 18 50 in 
Paplin ziemi Siedleckiej. he came from a family of landowners, and received a higher 
education in several languages and music. Entering the Congregation on September 1, 
1885, she made her perpetual vows in Warsaw in 1893, and was given responsible 
positions in the Congregation at an early age. In 1908 she became Superior of the house in 
Derdy near Warsaw. From 1912 she was superior in Warsaw, and from 1918, in Walendow. 
After the Congregation separated from its General headquarters in France in 1922 at the 
First Chapter in Poland, she became the first Superior General of all the homes in Poland. 
She kept this post for 6 years; i.e., until 1928, and then became assistant to the new 
Superior General. She died November 1, 1933. 

The directress of the postulants, Mother Jane Bartkiewicz, wits born July 31, 1858. She 
entered the Congregation on I December 10, 1877, and made her perpetual vows in Laval, 
France in 1885. While the Congregation of Our Lady of Mercy was dependent on the 
General Home in France, Mother J ane us Vicar General for the homes in Poland. 

She was a sturdy and energetic person, sometimes even despotic. She greatly loved the 
Congregation and wished its good, trying to achieve this in a way repugnant to human 
nature. Her relationship to candidates and the young professed Wits peculiarly warm and 
affectionate. She knew how to be tenderhearted, but at the same time her method of 
disciplining the sisters created an atmosphere of fear. 


After finishing her term as Vicar General, she was for a (me the Directress of Novices and 



of the third probation. For his reason she felt throughout her life that she had the privilege 
of correcting the young sisters. She died in Warsaw J uly 1, 1940 (A. SMDM-C and D). 

[10] Helen Kowalska arrived in Cracow on January 23, 1926, to finish her postulancy. That same 
day Sister Henry Losinska died in Cracow. Sister Henry was born on January 20, 1897. She 
entered the Community in 1920 and worked as a shoemaker (A. SMDM-D).

[11] Sister Margaret- Anna Gimbutt, was born in 1857 and entered the Congregation in 1893. 

She was of great service to the Congregation, performing the duty of Directress of Novices, 
superior of the house in Vilnius, and then, I nstructress of the Third Probation. She was 
known for her spirit of self-denial, mortification, demanding much of herself. Humble, 
meek, always prayerful, outstanding in the keeping of the rules, she was an example to the 
sisters, especially those who were in her care. 

[12] Bishop Stanislaus Rospond, born September 30, 1877, in Liszki near Cracow. After 
graduating from St. Ann's High School in Cracow, he entered the Seminary for the 
Priesthood. After a year he was sent for further studies in Insbruck, receiving the degree of 
Doctor of Theology in 1904. He was ordained priest on August 10, 1901. He became 
prefect of the Seminary in Cracow, and then, rector. He was the ordinary confessor of the 
Sisters of Our Lady of Mercy. On J une 12, 1927, he was consecrated bishop. He was Vicar 
General for many years. His relationship with the Congregation of the Sisters of Our Lady of 
Mercy was very cordial, and he took part in all the celebrations of the Congregation. Twice 

a year he was the main celebrant at the clothing ceremony and profession of vows. He died 
February 4, 1958 and is buried in his family grave in Liszki. 

[13] It was clothing day-April 30, 1926. Sister Clemens Buczek recalls that she was helping the 
candidates put on their habits. She wrote in her memoirs: "In May [sic], 1926, I was to 
dress Helen Kowalska. After she received the habit at the altar, I told her, ' Helen, let us 
hurry to put on your habit. 1 Helen fainted. I hurried to get the smelling salts in order to 
revive her.... Later I used to tease her about her loathing to leave the world. I only found 
out after her death that the reason of her fainting was not sorrow for the world, but 
something else" (A. SF. Recol.). 

[14] Sister Mary Joseph, Stephanie Brzoza, born in 1889. She entered the congregation in 1909 
and made her perpetual vows on May 15, 1917. She was a group instructor of the girls in 
the Cracow institute. In 1925 she was sent to the General House of the Congregation in 
Laval, France, to observe more closely the formation of novices and to absorb the spirit of 
the Congregation. After her return from Laval, she became directress of the novitiate on 
June 20, 1926, until October 30, 1934. She was an exemplary directress and a great 
discerner of souls. She was demanding, but at the same time full of motherly care and 
benevolence toward each novice. At the General Chapter in 1934, she was chosen to be a 
member of the General Council and simultaneously, superior of the Generalate in Warsaw. 
Five years later she died of cancer on November 9, 1939 (A. SMDM-C and D). 



[15] Father Theodore Czaputa was then the confessor of the novitiate. Born in 1884, he was 
ordained priest J uly 7, 1907. He completed his theological studies at the J agiellonian 
University in Cracow. From 1916 he taught religion in the high schools in Cracow. He was 
then made rector of the Minor Seminary and Tribunal J udge. From November 1925 he was 
confessor of the novices of the Congregation of Our Lady of Mercy. He performed this 
function almost until death, and the novices had great confidence in him. Because of ill 
health, he was released of the duties of rector and moved to Lagiewniki to become chaplain 
of the Sisters of Our Lady of Mercy. He died March 2, 1945 (A. Cracow Curia). 

[16] Superiors in the Congregation may command "in the name of holy obedience" only 
professed sisters. A novice was not obliged to obey such a command. If the directress used 
these words, she was relying on the good will and virtue of the novice, who by 
subordinating herself to the command could be relieved of these painful experiences (See 
Const. Congr. art., 96-99). 

[17] She probably means the words of the prophet Isaiah (49: 15 J B): "Does a woman forget her 
baby at the breast, or fail to cherish the son of her womb? Yet even if these forget, I will 
never forget you.". 

[18] Some details of the text suggest that it was at the Warsaw house. The superior was Mother 
Raphael Buczynska. She was one of the most outstanding superiors. She distinguished 
herself by a clear, healthy judgment of people and things, a very practical sense, and at

the same time a deep spiritual life. She loved the congregation and cared for its material 
and spiritual growth. In her relations to the sisters she was loving, straightforward, and 
discerning. She knew how to evaluate and put to. use the accomplishments of each sister. 
She never degraded an individual, but rather tried to raise each one's spirit, come to her 
aid and cheer her up. M. RaphaelCatherine Buczynska was born December 23, 1879. She 
entered the Congregation October 18, 1900, and died December 23, 1956 (A. SMDM-C). 

[19] The description points to the Warsaw house. The chapel was in a separate building. The 
entrance was from the yard. At that time the chapel was used exclusively by the sisters 
and their students. Lay persons hardly ever came there. 

[20] The Community was running homes for morally neglected and "difficult" girls. These were 
commonly referred to as "students," "wards," or "children." They were sent to the sisters 
by the Social Service or by parents, and some came of their own accord to do "penance." 
There were up to 230 girls at the Zytnia house. They were divided into three groups called 
"classes." The sister in charge of a group was called the "Mother of the Class." The entire 
description of the vision seems to be a prediction of the difficulties which the Servant of 
God will face in her work as apostle of The Divine Mercy. It also predicts the final triumph 
of this work, and herself in it. 

[21] The confessors were Father Kulesza and Father Roslaniec; the extraordinary confessor was 
Father Aloysius Bukowski, S.J . 



[22] The Rev. Prof. Michael Sopocko, born on November 1, 1888, at Nowosady, in the Vilnius 
region. He studied at the Roman Catholic Seminary in Vilnius. He was ordained priest on 
J une 15, 1914. Later he was graduated from the School of Theology of the Warsaw 
University and (in 1924) from the State Pedagogical Institute. In 1928 the Ministry of 
Religion and Public Education appointed him to the Chair of Pastoral Theology at the School 
of Theology of the Stefan Batory University in Vilnius. In 1934 he became docent of the 
Warsaw University, officially delegated to the Chair of Pastoral Theology at the University of 
Vilnius. In the same year he became rector of St. Michael's Church in Vilnius. For many 
years he was confessor to many communities of monks and nuns. He was ordinary 
confessor of the Sisters of Our Lady of Mercy from J anuary 1, 1933 to J anuary 1, 1942. 
During the war he was professor at the Seminary at Bialystok, where the Vilnius seminary 
had been transferred (A. SF. Autobiography). The chronicle of the Cracow house states that 
Father Sopocko was in Cracow on August 28, 1938. It is very likely that he visited the 
Servant of God at Pradnik then, but her notes stop before that date. The Rev. Msgr. Dr. 
Michael Sopocko died on Sister Faustina's name day, February 15, 1976, at 8 p.m. at 
Bialystok. The funeral took place on February 19. The main celebrant was His Excellency 
Most Rev. Bishop Henry Gulbinowicz, diocesan ordinary. With him 80 priests concelebrated. 
His Eminence, Stephen Card. Wyszynski, Prymate of Poland, sent a telegram expressing his 
condolences. 

[23] Before arriving in Vilnius, the Servant of God had seen her future spiritual director in two 
visions. The first took place in Warsaw, during the third probation, the second in Cracow, 
(See Diary, par. 53 and 61). 

[24] This was not yet consumption, which later spread throughout her whole body, but general 
exhaustion due to a new way of life, intense spiritual combat and experiences which made 
it difficult for her to perform her duties. 

[25] She was working in the girls' kitchen, where meals were prepared for more than 200 
people. 

[26] As the doctors found no organic disease in Sister Faustina, the sisters thought that she was 
feigning illness, and that she preferred prayer to work (A. SF. Recol.). 

[27] As Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed by fire falling from heaven (See Genesis 19:24), 
so Warsaw was indeed destroyed during World War II, as were many Polish towns, by 
incendiary and demolition bombs dropped from aircraft. 

[28] "Jozefinek," a newly created house of the Community, at 44 Hetmanska Street in the 
Grochow section of Warsaw. The new house was administered by the superior of the house 
at 3/9 Zytnia Street. 

[29] The confessors at Plock were Rev. Msgr. Adolf Modzelewski, Rev. Msgr. Louis Wilkonski, 
and Rev. Waclaw J ezusek.

[30] The superior of the Plock house was Mother Rosejane Klobukowska, born in 1882. She 
entered the congregation in 1902, and made her perpetual vows in 1909. She was superior 
in many of the houses of the congregation. From 1934-1945 she was Assistant to the 
Superior General. From 1946-1952 she was Superior General. 



[31] Father J oseph Andrasz, S.J born at Zakopane on October 16, 1891. He entered the J esuit 
Order on September 22, 1906, and was ordained on March 19, 1919. He worked at the 
Jesuit Publishing House (Wydawnictwo Apostolstwa Modlitwy) for eight years. In 1930 he 
became the manager of the Publishing House and editor of the monthly Messenger of the 
Sacred Heart (Poslaniec Serca J ezusowego). From 1932 he was the extraordinary confessor 
of the novitiate of the Sisters of Our Lady of Mercy. He died on February 1, 1963 (A. SJ-C). 

[32] Spiritual childhood according to the conception of St. Therese of the Child J esus (See 
Autobiography of a Soul). 

[33] Vilnius lies on the Wilia River. Across the river from the town, on woody hills, were the 
stations of the cross called "Calvary" (Polish Kalwaria). Going from station to station was 
called "Walking the Paths." It was possible to get there from the sisters' house by boat. 

[34] Mother Irene Krzyzanowska. Sister Irene-Mary Krzyzanowska was born on November 25, 
1889. She entered the Congregation on December 7, 1916 and made her perpetual vows 
April 30, 1924. She greatly loved the youth and was wholeheartedly given to the apostolic 
work. She served as educator in the institute for girls, assistant to the directress of the 
novitiate, superior, and assistant to the Superior General. After years of sacrificial toil she 
died in Wroclaw on December 3, 1971. 

[35] Probably Sister J ustine Golofit, a friend from the days of novitiate. Mother Irene, wanting to 
please the Servant of God, appointed her as a companion. 

Sister J ustine Golofit, born J uly 5, 1908 entered the Congregation in August 1927. She 
made her perpetual vows on October 30, 1934. After that she worked in the kitchen in 
Warsaw, Vilnius, and Radom. Because of heart trouble, she then did lighter work. She was 
one of the witnesses during the informational Process of the Servant of God. 

[36] Biala, a village near Plock (today known for its petroleum fields), where the Community had 
purchased some farm buildings and set up a rest home for the sisters and wards of the 
Plock house. The sisters lived in a small farmhouse situated in the garden, with the main 
entrance from the side of the garden. There was a porch before the main door. 

[37] Probably Father Peter Trojanczyk, who was recuperating at Biala and, at the same time, as 
the Community's chaplain, served the sisters in spiritual matters. While decorating the 
chapel with flowers, Sister Faustina probably wanted to put some in the chaplain's 
quarters. 

Rev. Peter Trojanczyk was born April 30, 1887 and was ordained priest on J une 22, 1913. 
On March 7, 1941, he was arrested by the Germans and sent to the camp in Dzialdow, 
where he was murdered that same year (Monthly Pastoral. Plock, nr. 9, 1949). 



[38] The wards were: Imelda, Edwarda, Ignasia, Margaret and Hedwig Owar (See A. SF. and 
letter J . Owar). The first four have died. Hedwig Owar was a witness in the information 
process. 

The Act concerning the vision was written in Vilnius on November 28, 1934 and signed by 
Sister Faustina, Sister Taida (who recorded Sister Faustina's statements), and Imelda. 

Mother Irene, the superior of the house, verified its authenticity. 

[39] The Directresses of the Novitiate made their own handbook on the vows, based on the 
work of Fr. Peter Cotelle, S.J ., "A Catechism of Vows." Each novice was to write the 
questions and answers in her notebook and study them by heart. 

[40] In the Community of Our Lady of Mercy, sisters live in common rooms, several to one 
room. The place occupied by each is separated from the others by a stable partition. These 
partitioned places are called cells. 

[41] Sister Stanislaus Stepczynska, who was ill, was staying at the Plock house at the time. 
Seeing that Sister Faustina was more recollected, meek and prayerful, she spied on her and 
even checked her bed in search of extraordinary tools of penance (information provided by 
Sister Christine Korzeniowska). 

[42] That is elsewhere in the diary. For a long time Sister Faustina did not take notes of her

experiences and of graces received. It was only at the explicit order of her confessor, 

Father Sopocko, that she began to write down her experiences as they occurred, and also 
earlier ones as she remembered them. After some time, she burned her notes. Father 
Sopocko gives the following account: "When I was in the Holy Land for a few weeks, she 
was persuaded by a supposed angel to burn the diary. As penance, I told her to reconstruct 
the part destroyed. But in the meantime new experiences came, and she wrote down new 
and old things alternately. Hence the lack of chronological order in the diary." 

[43] There are indications that it was in the house in Zytnia Street in Warsaw. The following 
senior mothers were there at the time: Mother Jane Bartkiewicz, Mother Margaret Gimbutt, 
Mother Raphael Buczynska, Mother Michael Moraczewska, Superior General. There is some 
probability that it was done by Mother Jane Bartkiewicz, who was very much interested in 
the young sisters. 

[44] Perpetual vows. In the Congregation of Our Lady of Mercy, the Superior General, after 
hearing her Council, either admits a professed sister to perpetual vows or dismisses her 
after five years of temporary vows (Const.). 

[45] Sister Faustina was set at peace during a retreat conducted by Father Andrasz from April 
20 to April 30, 1933. He understood her and gave her sound advice on how to proceed 
along the road of God's leadings. 

[46] The Servant of God had in mind here the fulfillment of God's desires regarding the painted 
image of Christ with the red and pale rays and the signature: "Jesus, I trust in You"; the 
public veneration of the image; and the making known of the chaplet and novena to The 
Divine Mercy. All these demands were realized as a result of the endeavors of Father 
Sopocko. 



[47] Sister Faustina, then a postulant, was working in the kitchen with Sister Marcianna 
Oswiecimska. Sister Marcianna told her to wash and put away the dishes, and left. Helen 
(later Sister Faustina) set to work, but Sisters kept coming for the second dinner, and 
every now and then one of them would ask Helen to serve her dinner or do her a favor. 
Helen, not wanting to refuse, served each one, but did not do her assigned work. When 
Sister Marcianna came back and saw the dishes still not put away, she thought Helen had 
neglected her order and told her that for a penance she was to sit on the table, while she 
herself did the work. 

Sister Marcianna-J ulia Oswiecimska was born in 1897. She entered the Congregation in 
1919. For many years she fulfilled the duties of a cook. She was energetic, demanding, but 
full of love of neighbor (Sister Marcianna's Recol.). 

[48] Only superiors can give orders "by virtue of obedience," and that concerning only serious 
matters. Sister Marcianna could not do it and certainly did not do it. She told Helen to sit 
on the table as a form of penance. Helen was surprised by this kind of penance and 
hesitated to obey the order. Then Sister Marcianna asked the postulant: "Is this what your 
obedience is like, Helen?" This question was misunderstood by Sister Faustina as an order 
"by virtue of obedience" (Sister Marcianna's Recol.). 

[49] In some houses, including the Warsaw house at Zytnia Street, Sisters used to have a night 
watch. The Sisters on duty would circle the house, light the yard, and look through the 
windows to protect the house against burglary. 

[50] This is the popular name of the Franciscan Sisters of the Family of Mary, a congregation 
founded by Archbishop Felinski in 1857. The motherhouse of the Congregation is in 
Warsaw, at Zelazna Street and is next to the Generalate of the Congregation of the Sisters 
of Our Lady of Mercy. 

[51] See footnote 7. 

[52] She was probably replacing Sister Modest Rzeczkowska, who was ill and had to undergo 
treatment in Warsaw (Recol. of Sister Pelagia). 

[53] All sisters devote one day at the beginning of the month to spiritual renewal, the so called 
one-day retreat. There is no recreation on that day. The sisters keep silence and have an 
hour of meditation, the Way of the Cross, monthly , examination of conscience, and a half 
hour meditation about death (cf. Const. Congr.). 

[54] Every month, each novice spent one day, appointed by the Sister Directress, as the so- 
called day of the crusade. On that day she was obliged to practice greater recollection and

union with the Lord J esus in the Eucharist, ask the Sister Directress for some additional 
mortification, and offer all her work, prayer and sufferings to the Lord Jesus in atonement 
for sinners. Some sisters continued this practice even after leaving the novitiate. 

[55] Sister Faustina left 4 pages empty. She probably intended to go back and fill in some past 
experiences, but did not. 



[56] The "Third Probation" is a period of preparation for the sisters who are to make their 
perpetual vows. I n the Congregation of the Sisters of Our Lady of Mercy, it lasts for five 
months. The Servant of God made her Third Probation in 1932/33 in Warsaw. The 
Directress was Mother Margaret Gimbutt. 

[57] Walendow, a house of the Congregation, located 20 km from Warsaw. The sisters had a 
home for girls there. I n 1936, at the suggestion of the Ministry of J ustice, a reformatory for 
first offenders (girls and women) was established there. Apart from the retreat, Sister 
Faustina was at Walendow from March 25 till May 1936. 

[58] The retreat was conducted by Rev. Edmund Elter, S.J . He was born on November 14, 1887. 
He joined the order on J uly 15, 1905. Outstandingly gifted, he studied the humanities, 
theology, and (in 1919/ 20) international law at the Warsaw University. Next he studied in 
Rome and in France. In 1926 he became a professor of ethics at the Gregorianum in Rome. 
From 1932 to 1935 he was in Warsaw, and then went back to Rome as a professor of 
homiletics and rhetoric. He died in Rome on August 27, 1955. 

[59] The center of a former estate about 1 km from Walendow, where the Congregation has a 
home for children. It comes from the foundation of Princess Czetwertynska, who gave the 
Congregation a tract of agricultural land, forest and some farm buildings for a home for 
morally threatened children. Until 1947 the home was administered by the superior