 in 
my youth, be blessed; should You let me live to a ripe old age, be blessed. Should You give 
me health and strength, be blessed; should You confine me to a bed of pain for my whole 
life, be blessed. Should you give only failures and disappointments in life, be blessed. 

Should You allow my purest intentions to be condemned, be blessed. Should You enlighten 
my mind, be blessed. Should You leave me in darkness and all kinds of torments, be 
blessed. 

From this moment on, I live in the deepest peace, because the Lord himself is carrying me 
in the hollow of His hand. He, Lord of unfathomable mercy, knows that I desire Him alone in 
all things, always and everywhere. 

1265 Prayer. O Jesus, stretched out upon the cross, I implore You, give me the grace of doing 
faithfully the most holy will of Your Father, in all things, always and everywhere. And when 
this will of God will seem to me very harsh and difficult to fulfill, it is then I beg You, Jesus, 
may power and strength flow upon me from Your wounds, and may my lips keep repeating, 
"Your will be done, 0 Lord." O Savior of the world, Lover of man's salvation, who in such 
terrible torment and pain forget Yourself to think only of the salvation of souls, 0 most 
compassionate J esus, grant me the grace to forget myself that I may live totally for souls, 
helping You in the work of salvation, according to the most holy will of Your Father.... 



1266 August 5, [1937]. [2091 The Lord let me know how much our dear Mother Superior [I rene] is 
defending me against... not only by prayer but also by deed. Thank You, Jesus, for this 
grace. It will not go unrequited in my heart; when I am with Jesus, I do not forget about 
her. 

1267 September 6, 1937. Today, I begin a new assignment. I go from the garden to the desert of 
the gate. [2101 I went in to talk to the Lord for a while. I asked Him for a blessing and for 
graces to faithfully carry out the duties entrusted to me. I heard these words: My 

daughter, I am always with you. I have given you the opportunity to practice 
deeds of mercy which you will perform according to obedience. You will give Me 
much pleasure if, each evening, you will speak to Me especially about this task. I 

felt that Jesus had given me a new grace in relation to my new duties; but, despite this, I 
have locked myself deeper in His Heart. 

1268 Today I felt more ill, but J esus has given me many more opportunities on this day to 
practice virtue. It so happened that I was busier than usual, and the sister in charge of the 
kitchen made it clear to me how irritated she was that I had come late for dinner, although 
it was quite impossible for me to have come sooner. At any rate, I felt so unwell that I had 
to ask Mother Superior to allow me to lie down. I went to ask Sister N. to take my place, 
and again I got a scolding: "What is this, Sister, you're so exhausted that you're going back 
to bed again! Confound you with all this lying in bed!" I put up with all that, but that wasn't 
the end. I still had to ask the sister who was in charge of the sick to bring me my meal. 
When I told her this, she burst out of the chapel into the corridor after me to give me a 

piece of her mind: "Why on earth are you going to bed, Sister, etc I asked her not to 

bother bringing me anything. I am writing all this very briefly because it is not my intention 
to write about such things, and I am doing so merely to dissuade souls from treating others 
in this way, for this is displeasing to the Lord. I n a suffering soul we should see J esus 
Crucified, and not a loafer or burden on the community. A soul who suffers with submission 
to the will of God draws down more blessings on the whole convent than all the working 
sisters. Poor indeed is a convent where there are no sick sisters. God often grants many 
and great graces out of regard for the souls who are suffering, and He withholds many 
punishments solely because of the suffering souls. 

1269 0 my Jesus, when shall we look upon souls with higher motives in mind? When will our 
judgments be true? You give us occasions to practice deeds of mercy, and instead we use 
the occasions to pass judgment. I n order to know whether the love of God flourishes in a 
convent, one must ask how they treat the sick, the disabled, and the infirm who are there.

1270 September 10, [1937]. I learned in the course of meditation that the purer the soul, the 
greater her communion with God on the spiritual level. She pays little heed to the senses 
and their protests. God is a Spirit, and so I love Him in spirit and in truth. 

1271 When I heard how dangerous it was to be at the gate these days because of revolutionary 
disturbances and how many evil people have a hatred for convents, I went in and had a talk 
with the Lord and asked Him to so arrange it that no evil person would dare come to the 
gate. Then I heard these words: My daughter, the moment you went to the gate I set 
a Cherub over it to guard it. Be at peace. After returning from my conversation with the 
Lord, I saw a little white cloud and, in it, a Cherub with his hands joined. His gaze was like 
lightning, and I understood how the fire of God's love burns in that look.... 


1272 September 14, 1937. Exaltation of the Holy Cross. Today I saw what great opposition this 
priest [Father Sopocko] is experiencing in regard to this whole matter. Even devout souls 
who are zealous for God's glory are opposing him. That he is not discouraged by all this is 
due to a special grace of God. 

1273 J esus: My daughter, do you think you have written enough about My mercy? What 
you have written is but a drop compared to the ocean. I am Love and Mercy itself. 
There is no misery that could be a match for My mercy, neither will misery exhaust 
it, because as it is being granted-it increases. The soul that trusts in My mercy is 
most fortunate, because I myself take care of it. 

1274 I experience great torments of soul when I see God offended. Today I recognized that 
mortal sins were being committed not far from our door. It was evening. I prayed earnestly 
in the chapel, and then I went to scourge myself. When I knelt down to pray, however, the 
Lord allowed me to experience how a soul rejected by God suffers. It seems to me that my 
heart was torn to pieces, and at the same time I understood how much such a soul wounds 
the most merciful Heart of Jesus. The poor creature does not want to accept God's mercy. 
The more God has pursued a soul with His mercy, the more just will He be towards it. 

1275 My Secretary, write that I am more generous toward sinners than toward the just. 
It was for their sake that I came down from heaven; it was for their sake that My 
Blood was spilled. Let them not fear to approach Me; they are most in need of My 
mercy. 

1276 September 16, 1937. I wanted very much to make a Holy Hour before the Blessed 
Sacrament today, but God's will was otherwise. At eight o'clock I was seized with such 
violent pains that I had to go to bed at once. I was convulsed with pain for three hours; that 
is, until eleven o'clock at night. No medicine had any effect on me, and whatever I 
swallowed I threw up. At times, the pains caused me to lose consciousness. Jesus had me 
realize that in this way I took part in His Agony in the Garden, and that He himself allowed 
these sufferings in order to offer reparation to God for the souls murdered in the wombs of 
wicked mothers. I have gone through these sufferings three times now. They always start 
at eight o'clock in the evening and last until eleven. No medicine can lessen these 
sufferings. When eleven o'clock comes, they cease by themselves, and I fall asleep at that 
moment. The following day, I feel very weak. 

This happened to me for the first time when I was at the sanatorium. The doctors couldn't 
get to the bottom of it, and no injection or medicine helped me at all nor did I myself have 
any idea of what the sufferings were about. I told the doctor that never before in my life 
had I experienced such sufferings, and he declared he did not know what sort of pains they 
are. But now I understand the nature of these pains, because the Lord himself has made 
this known to me.... Yet when I think that I may perhaps suffer in this way again, I tremble. 
But I don't know whether I'll ever again suffer in this way; I leave that to God. What it 
pleases God to send, I will accept with submission and love. If only I could save even one 
soul from murder by means of these sufferings! 


1277 On the day after these sufferings, I can sense the condition of souls and their disposition 
towards God; I am pervaded with true knowledge. 



1278 I receive Holy Communion in the manner of the angels, so to speak. My soul is filled with

God's light and nourishes itself from Him. My feelings are as if dead. This is a purely 
spiritual union with God; it is a great predominance of spirit over nature. 

1279 The Lord gave me knowledge of the graces which He has been constantly lavishing on me. 
This light pierced me through and through, and I came to understand the inconceivable 
favors that God has been bestowing on me. I stayed in my cell for a long act of 
thanksgiving, lying face down on the ground and shedding tears of gratitude. I could not 
rise from the ground because, whenever I tried to do so, God's light gave me new 
knowledge of His grace. It was only at the third attempt that I was able to get up. As His 
child, I felt that everything the heavenly Father possessed was equally mine. He himself 
lifted me from the ground up to His Heart. I felt that everything that existed was exclusively 
mine, but I had no desire for it all, because God alone is enough for me. 

1280 Today I learned with what aversion the Lord comes to a certain soul in Holy Communion. He 
goes to that heart as to a dark prison, to undergo torture and affliction. I kept begging His 
pardon and offering atonement for the offense. 

1281 The Lord made known to me that I would see my brother [Stanley [2111 ], but I could not 
understand how this would happen or why he should come to visit me. I knew that God had 
given him the grace of a religious vocation, but why should he be coming to visit me? 
However, I put aside these thoughts and believed that if the Lord had given me to know he 
would come, that was enough for me. I fixed my thoughts on God, putting aside every I 
preoccupation with creatures and entrusting everything to the Lord. 

1282 + When the same poor people come to the gate a second time, I treat them with greater 
gentleness, and I do not let them see that I know they have been here before; [I do this] in 
order not to embarrass them. And then they speak to me freely about their troubles and 
needs. 

Although Sister N. tells me that is not the way to deal with beggars, and slams the door in 
their faces, when she is not there, I treat them as my Master would. Sometimes more is 
given when giving nothing, than when giving much in a rude manner. 

1283 Often the Lord gives me interior knowledge concerning the persons I meet at the gate. One 
pitiable soul wanted to tell me a bit about herself. Taking advantage of the opportunity, I 
made her understand, in a delicate way, the miserable condition of her soul. She went away 
with a better disposition. 

1284 September 17, [1937.] 0 Jesus, I see so much beauty scattered around me, beauty for 
which I give You constant thanks. But I see that some souls are like stone, always cold and 
unfeeling. Even miracles hardly move them. Their eyes are always fixed on their feet, and 
so they see nothing but themselves. 

1285 You have surrounded my life with Your tender and loving care, more than I can 
comprehend, for I will understand Your goodness in its entirety only when the veil is lifted. I 
desire that my whole life be but one act of thanksgiving to You, 0 God. 


1286 + Thank You, 0 God, for all the graces 
Which unceasingly You lavish upon me, 

Graces which enlighten me with the brilliance of the sun, 

For by them You show me the sure way. 

Thank You, 0 Lord, for creating me, 

For calling me into being from nothingness, 

For imprinting Your divinity on my soul, 

The work of sheer merciful love. 

Thank You, 0 God, for Holy Baptism 
Which engrafted me into Your family, 

A gift great beyond all thought or expression 
Which transforms my soul. 

Thank You, 0 Lord, for Holy Confession, 

For that inexhaustible spring of great mercy, 

For that inconceivable fountain of graces 
In which sin-tainted souls become purified. 

Thank You, 0 Jesus, for Holy Communion 
In which You give us Yourself. 

I feel Your Heart beating within my breast 
As You cause Your divine life to unfold within me. 

Thank You, 0 Holy Spirit, for the Sacrament of Confirmation, 

Which dubs me Your knight 

And gives strength to my soul at each moment, 

Protecting me from evil. 

Thank You, 0 God, for the grace of a vocation. 

For being called to serve You alone, 

Leading me to make You my sole love, 

An unequal honor for my soul. 

Thank You, 0 Lord, for perpetual vows, 

For that union of pure love, 

For having deigned to unite Your pure heart with mine 
And uniting my heart to Yours in the purest of bonds.

Thank You, O Lord, for the Sacrament of Anointing 
Which, in my final moments, will give me strength; 

My help in battle, my guide to salvation, 

Fortifying my soul till we rejoice forever. 

Thank You, O God, for all the inspirations 
That Your goodness lavishes upon me, 

For the interior lights given my soul, 

Which the heart senses, but words cannot express. 

Thank You, 0 Holy Trinity, for the vastness of the graces 
Which You have lavished on me unceasingly through life. 

My gratitude will intensify as the eternal dawn rises, 



When, for the first time, I sing to Your glory. 

1287 + Despite the peace in my soul, I fight a continuous battle with the enemy of my soul. More 
and more, I am discovering his traps, and the battle flares up anew. During interludes of 
calm, I exercise myself and keep watch, lest the enemy find me unprepared. And when I 
see his great fury, I stay inside the stronghold; that is, the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus. 

1288 September 19, [1937]. Today, the Lord told me, My daughter, write that it pains Me 
very much when religious souls receive the Sacrament of Love merely out of habit, 
as if they did not distinguish this food. I find neither faith nor love in their hearts. 

I go to such souls with great reluctance. It would be better if they did not receive 
Me. 

1289 Most sweet Jesus, set on fire my love for You and transform me into Yourself. Divinize me 
that my deeds may be pleasing to You. May this be accomplished by the power of the Holy 
Communion which I receive daily. Oh, how greatly I desire to be wholly transformed into 
You, 0 Lord! 

1290 September 19, 1937. Today, my own brother, Stanley, visited me. I rejoiced greatly in this 
beautiful soul, who also intends to devote himself to God's service. That is to say, God 
himself is drawing him to His love. We talked for a long time about God, about His 
goodness. During this conversation with him, I learned how pleasing his soul was to God. I 
received permission from Mother Superior to see him more often. When he asked my advice 
about entering religion, I replied, "Surely you know best what God is asking of you." I 
mentioned the J esuit Order, but said, "Enter wherever you like." I promised to pray for him, 
and I decided to make a novena to the Sacred Heart through the intercession of Father 
Peter Skarga with the promise of having it announced in the Messenger of the Sacred Heart, 
[ 2 i 2 i because he is having great difficulties in this matter. I understood that, in this case, 
prayer was more useful than advice. 

1291 September 21. Having awakened several times during the night, I thanked God briefly, but 
with all my heart, for all the graces He has given to me and to our Congregation, [and] I 
reflected on His great goodness. 

1292 When I received Holy Communion, I said to Him, "Jesus, I thought about You so many 
times last night," and Jesus answered me, And I thought of you before I called you 
into being. "J esus, in what way were You thinking about me?" I n terms of admitting you 
to My eternal happiness. After these words, my soul was flooded with the love of God. I 
could not stop marveling at how much God loves us. 


1293 It so happened that I fell again into a certain error, in spite of a sincere resolution not to do 
so-even though the lapse was a minor imperfection and rather involuntary-and at this I felt 
such acute pain in my soul that I interrupted my work and went to the chapel for a while. 
Falling at the feet of Jesus, with love and a great deal of pain, I apologized to the Lord, all 
the more ashamed because of the fact that in my conversation with Him after Holy 
Communion this very morning I had promised to be faithful to Him. Then I heard these 
words: If it hadn't been for this small imperfection, you wouldn't have come to Me. 
Know that as often as you come to Me, humbling yourself and asking My 
forgiveness, I pour out a superabundance of graces on your soul, and your 
imperfection vanishes before My eyes, and I see only your love and your humility. 
You lose nothing but gain much... 

1294 The Lord has given me to know that when a soul does not accept the graces intended for it, 
another soul receives them immediately. O my Jesus, make me worthy of accepting Your 
graces because, of myself, I can do nothing. Without Your help, I cannot even utter Your 
Name worthily. 

1295 September 25, [1937.] When I learned how great are the difficulties in this whole work, I

went to the Lord and said, "J esus, don't You see how they are hindering Your work?" And I 
heard a voice in my soul: Do as much as is in your power, and don't worry about the 
rest. These difficulties prove that this work is Mine. Be at peace so long as you do 
all that is in your power. 

1296 Today, I opened the gate for Mother Superior and knew interiorly that she was going to 
town on business regarding the work of the Divine Mercy. It is this superior who has 
contributed most to this whole work of mercy. 

1297 Today I imprudently asked two poor children if they really had nothing to eat at home. The 
children, without answering me, walked away from the gate. I understood how difficult it 
was for them to speak about their poverty, so I went after them in a hurry and brought, 
them back, giving them as much as I had permission for. 

1298 O God, show me Your mercy 

According to the compassion of the Heart of J esus. 

Hear my sighs and entreaties, 

And the tears of a contrite heart. 

0 Omnipotent, ever-merciful God, 

Your compassion is never exhausted. 

Although my misery is as vast as the sea, 

1 have complete trust in the mercy of the Lord. 

0 Eternal Trinity, yet ever-gracious God, 

Your compassion is without measure. 

And so I trust in the sea of Your mercy, 

And sense You, Lord, though a veil holds me aloof. 

May the omnipotence of Your mercy, 0 Lord, 

Be glorified all over the world. 

May its veneration never cease. 

Proclaim, my soul, God's mercy with fervor. 



1299 September 27, [1937]. Today, Mother Superior and I went to see a certain gentleman [2i3i 
where they were printing and painting small holy cards of The Divine Mercy, and also the 
invocations and the chaplet, which have already received approbation. And we were also to 
see the improved larger image. [2i4i It very much resembles the original. This made me 
very happy. 

1300 When I looked at this image, I was pierced with such a lively love for God that, for a 
moment, I did not know where I was. When we had finished our business, we went to the 
Church of the Most Holy Virgin Mary. We attended Holy Mass, during which the Lord gave 
me to know what a great number of souls would attain salvation through this work. Then I 
entered into an intimate conversation with the Lord, thanking Him for having condescended 
to grant me the grace of seeing how the veneration of His unfathomable mercy is 
spreading. I immersed myself in a profound prayer of thanksgiving. Oh, how great is God's 
generosity! Blessed be the Lord, who is faithful in His promises... 

1301 It is extraordinary how Mother Irene has so much light from God concerning this whole 
matter. She was the first to allow me to carry out the Lord's wishes, although it was not 
until two years after the revelation that she became my superior. And despite this fact, she 
was the first to go with me when the painting of the image was first undertaken. And now 
again, when some things concerning the Divine Mercy are being published, and small holy 
cards are being printed, again it is she who is going with me [to take care of] this matter. 
God has ordained all this in a mysterious way, because this was begun in Vilnius, and now 
God's will has so directed the circumstances that this matter is being continued in Cracow. I 
know how pleasing this superior is to God; I see how God is directing everything and wants 
me to be under her protection during these important times.... Thank You, Lord, for such 
superiors, who live in the love and fear of God. That is why I pray for her most of all, 
because she has put herself out the most for the sake of this work of Divine Mercy.... 

1302 September 29, [1937]. Today, I have come to understand many of God's mysteries. I have 
come to know that Holy Communion remains in me until the next Holy Communion. A vivid 
and clearly felt presence of God continues in my soul. The awareness of this plunges me 
into deep recollection, without the slightest effort on my part. My heart is a living tabernacle 
in which the living Host is reserved. I have never sought God in some far-off place, but 
within myself. It is in the depths of my own being that I commune with my God. 

1303 My God, despite all the graces, I long without cease to be eternally united with my God; 
and the better I know Him, the more ardently I desire Him. 


J.M.J. 


1304 With longing I gaze into the starlit sky, 

I nto the sapphire of fathomless firmaments.

There the pure heart leaps out to find You, 0 God, 

And yearns to be freed of the bonds of the flesh. 

With great longing, I gaze upon you, my homeland, 

When will this, my exile, come to an end? 

O J esus, such is the call of Your bride 
Who suffers agony in her thirst for You. 

With longing, I gaze at the footprints of the saints 

Who crossed this wilderness on their way to the fatherland. 

They left me the example of their virtue and their counsels, 

And they say to me, "Patience, Sister, soon the fetters will break." 

But my longing soul hears not these words. 

Ardently it yearns for its Lord and its God, 

And it understands not human language, 

Because it is enamored of Him alone. 

My longing soul, wounded with love, 

Forces its way through all created things 
And unites itself with infinite eternity, 

With the Lord whom my heart has espoused. 

Allow my longing soul, O God, 

To be drowned in Your Divine Three- fold Essence. 

Fulfill my desires, for which I humbly beg You, 

With a heart brimming with love's fire. 

1305 A certain person came to the door today and asked to be admitted as one of our students. 
But she could not be admitted. She was in great need of our house. During the conversation 
which I had with her, the Passion of Jesus was renewed in me. When she had gone, I 
undertook one of the severest mortifications. Nevertheless, the next time I will not let such 
a soul get away. For three days I suffered much on her account. How much I regret that our 
institutions are so small and that they cannot accommodate a greater number of souls. My 
Jesus, You know how much I grieve over every straying sheep.... 

1306 + O humility, lovely flower, I see how few souls possess you. Is it because you are so 
beautiful and at the same time so difficult to attain? 0 yes, it is both the one and the other. 
Even God takes great pleasure in her. The floodgates of heaven are open to a humble soul, 
and a sea of graces flows down upon her. 0 how beautiful is a humble soul! From her heart, 
as from a censer, rises a varied and most pleasing fragrance which breaks through the skies 
and reaches God himself, filling His Most Sacred Heart with joy. God refuses nothing to such 
a soul; she is all-powerful and influences the destiny of the whole world. God raises such a 
soul up to His very throne, and the more she humbles herself, the more God stoops down to 
her, pursuing her with His graces and accompanying her at every moment with His 
omnipotence. Such a soul is most deeply united with God. O humility, strike deep roots in 
my whole being. O Virgin most pure, but also most humble, help me to attain deep 
humility. Now I understand why there are so few saints; it is because so few souls are 
deeply humble. 



1307 Eternal Love, Depth of Mercy, O Triune Holiness, yet One God, whose bosom is full of love 
for all, as a good Father You scorn no one. O Love of God, Living Fountain, pour Yourself out 
upon us, Your unworthy creatures. May our misery not hold back the torrents of Your love, 
for indeed, there is no limit to Your mercy. 

1308 + Jesus, I have noticed that You seem to be less concerned with me. Yes, My child, I am 
replacing Myself with your spiritual director [Father Andrasz]. He is taking care of 
you according to My will. Respect his every word as My own. He is the veil behind 
which I am hiding. Your director and I are one; his words are My words. 

1309 When I make the Way of the Cross, I am deeply moved at the twelfth station. Here I reflect 
on the omnipotence of God's mercy which passed through the Heart of Jesus. In this open 
wound of the Heart of Jesus I enclose all poor humans... and those individuals whom I love, 
as often as I make the Way of the Cross. From that Fount of Mercy issued the two rays; 
that is, the Blood and the Water. With the immensity of their grace they flood the whole 
world.... 

1310 When one is ill and weak, one must constantly make efforts to measure up to what others 
are doing as a matter of course. But even those matter-of-course things cannot always be 
managed. Nevertheless, thank You, Jesus, for everything, because it is not the greatness of 
the works, but the greatness of the effort that will be rewarded. What is done out of love is 
not small, 0 my Jesus, for Your eyes see everything. I do not know why I feel so terribly 
unwell in the morning; I have to muster all my strength to get out of bed, sometimes even

to the point of heroism. The thought of Holy Communion gives me back a little more 
strength. And so, the day starts with a struggle and ends with a struggle. When I go to take 
my rest, I feel like a soldier returning from the battlefield. You alone, my Lord and Master, 
know what this day has contained. 

1311 Meditation. During meditation, the sister on the kneeler next to mine keeps coughing and 
clearing her throat, sometimes without a break. It occurred to me once that I might take 
another place for the time of the meditation, because Mass had already been offered. But 
then I thought that if I did change my place, the sister would notice this and might feel hurt 
that I had moved away from her. So I decided to continue in prayer in my usual place, and 
to offer this act of patience to God. Toward the end of the meditation, my soul was flooded 
with God's consolation, and this to the limit of what my heart could bear; and the Lord gave 
me to know that if I had moved away from that sister I would have moved away also from 
those graces that flowed into my soul. 

1312 + Jesus came to the main entrance today, under the guise of a poor young man. This young 
man, emaciated, barefoot and bareheaded, and with his clothes in tatters, was frozen 
because the day was cold and rainy. He asked for something hot to eat. So I went to the 
kitchen, but found nothing there for the poor. But, after searching around for some time, I 
succeeded in finding some soup, which I reheated and into which I crumbled some bread, 
and I gave it to the poor young man, who ate it. As I was taking the bowl from him, he 
gave me to know that He was the Lord of heaven and earth. When I saw Him as He was, He 
vanished from my sight. When I went back in and reflected on what had happened at the 
gate, I heard these words in my soul: My daughter, the blessings of the poor who 
bless Me as they leave this gate have reached My ears. And your compassion, 
within the bounds of obedience, has pleased Me, and this is why I came down 
from My throne-to taste the fruits of your mercy. 



1313 0 my J esus, now everything is clear to me, and I understand all that has just happened. I 
somehow felt and asked myself what sort of a poor man is this who radiates such modesty. 
From that moment on, there was stirred up in my heart an even purer love toward the poor 
and the needy. Oh, how happy I am that my superiors have given me such a task! I 
understand that mercy is manifold; one can do good always and everywhere and at all 
times. An ardent love of God sees all around itself constant opportunities to share itself 
through deed, word and prayer. Now I understand the words which You spoke to me, O 
Lord, some time ago. 

1314 + Oh, what great efforts I must make to carry out my duties well when my health is so 
poor! This will be known to You alone, 0 Christ. 

1315 + In times of interior desolation I do not lose my peace, because I know that God never 
abandons a soul, except perhaps only when the soul itself breaks the bond of love by its 
unfaithfulness. However, all creatures without exception depend on the Lord and are 
maintained by His omnipotence. Some are under the rule of love, others under the rule of 
justice. It depends on us under which rule we want to live, because no one is refused the 
aid of sufficient grace. I am not frightened at all by my apparent abandonment. I examine 
myself more profoundly to discover whether this is due to my fault. If this is not the case- 
then may [the Lord] be blessed! 

1316 October 1, 1937. Daughter, I need sacrifice lovingly accomplished, because that 
alone has meaning for Me. Enormous indeed are the debts of the world which are 
due to Me; pure souls can pay them by their sacrifice, exercising mercy in spirit. 

1317 I understand Your words, Lord, and the magnitude of the mercy that ought to shine in my 
soul. Jesus: I know. My daughter, that you understand it and that you do 
everything within your power. But write this for the many souls who are often 
worried because they do not have the material means with which to carry out an 
act of mercy. Yet spiritual mercy, which requires neither permissions nor 
storehouses, is much more meritorious and is within the grasp of every soul. If a 
soul does not exercise mercy somehow or other, it will not obtain My mercy on the 
day of judgment. Oh, if only souls knew how to gather eternal treasure for

themselves, they would not be judged, for they would forestall My judgment with 
their mercy. 

1318 October 10, [1937]. 0 my Jesus, in thanksgiving for Your many graces, I offer You my body 
and soul, intellect and will, and all the sentiments of my heart. Through the vows, I have 
given myself entirely to You; I have then nothing more that I can offer You. J esus said to 
me, My daughter, you have not offered Me that which is really yours. I probed 
deeply into myself and found that I love God with all the faculties of my soul and, unable to 
see what it was that I had not yet given to the Lord, I asked, "Jesus, tell me what it is, and 

I will give it to You at once with a generous heart." Jesus said to me with kindness, 
Daughter, give Me your misery, because it is your exclusive property. At that 
moment, a ray of light illumined my soul, and I saw the whole abyss of my misery. In that 
same moment I nestled close to the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus with so much trust that 
even if I had the sins of all the damned weighing on my conscience, I would not have 
doubted God's mercy but, with a heart crushed to dust, I would have thrown myself into the 
abyss of Your mercy. I believe, O J esus, that You would not reject me, but would absolve 
me through the hand of Your representative. 



1319 You expired, Jesus, but the source of life gushed forth for souls, and the ocean of mercy 
opened up for the whole world. 0 Fount of Life, unfathomable Divine Mercy, envelop the 
whole world and empty Yourself out upon us. 

1320 At three o'clock, implore My mercy, especially for sinners; and, if only for a brief 
moment, immerse yourself in My Passion, particularly in My abandonment at the 
moment of agony. This is the hour of great mercy for the whole world. I will allow 
you to enter into My mortal sorrow. I n this hour, I will refuse nothing to the soul 
that makes a request of Me in virtue of My Passion.... 

+ J. M. J. 

1321 Hail, most merciful Heart of Jesus, 

Living Fountain of all graces, 

Our sole shelter, our only refuge; 

In You I have the light of hope. 

Hail, most compassionate Heart of my God, 

Unfathomable living Fount of Love 
From which gushes life for sinful man 
And the Spring of all sweetness. 

Hail, open Wound of the Most Sacred Heart, 

From which the rays of mercy issued forth 
And from which it was given us to draw life 
With the vessel of trust alone. 

Hail, God's goodness, incomprehensible, 

Never to be measured or fathomed, 

Full of love and mercy, though always holy, 

Yet, like a good mother, ever bent o'er us. 

Hail, Throne of Mercy, Lamb of God, 

Who gave Your life in sacrifice for me, 

Before whom my soul humbles itself daily, 

Living in faith profound. 

[End of Notebook Four] 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-521 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1 001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1 151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-1321 

Notebook V: 1322-1 400 t 1401-1450 t 1451-1500 t 


1501-1550 t 1551-1589 


Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 


Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 5 


1322 + 

J.M.J. 

The barque of my life sails along 
Amid darkness and shadows of night, 

And I see no shore; 

I am sailing the high seas. 

The slightest storm would drown me, 

Engulfing my boat in the swirling depths, 

If You yourself did not watch over me, O God, 

At each instant and moment of my life. 

Amid the roaring waves 
I sail peacefully, trustingly, 

And gaze like a child into the distance without fear, 

Because You, 0 Jesus, are my Light. 

Dread and terror is all about me, 

But within my soul is peace more profound than the depths of the sea, 
For he who is with You, O Lord, will not perish; 

Of this Your love assures me, 0 God. 

Though a host of dangers surround me, 

None of them do I fear, for I fix my gaze on the starry sky, 

And I sail along bravely and merrily, 

As becomes a pure heart. 

And if the ship of my life sails so peacefully,

This is due to but one thing above all: 

You are my helmsman, O God. 

This I confess with utmost humility. 

+ 

J.M.J. 

1323 O my God, I love You. 

Sister Faustina of the Blessed Sacrament. 

Cracow, October 20, 1937. 



1324 + I bow down before You, 0 Bread of Angels, 

With deep faith, hope and love 

And from the depths of my soul I worship You, 

Though I am but nothingness. 

I bow down before You, 0 hidden God 
And love You with all my heart. 

The veils of mystery hinder me not at all; 

I love You as do Your chosen ones in heaven. 

I bow down before You, 0 Lamb of God 
Who take away the sins of my soul, 

Whom I receive into my heart each morn, 

You who are my saving help. 

+ J. M. J. 

Cracow, October 20, 1937. 

Fifth Notebook 

1325 0 my God, let everything that is in me praise You, my Lord and Creator; and with every 
beat of my heart I want to praise Your unfathomable mercy. I want to tell souls of Your 
goodness and encourage them to trust in Your mercy. That is my mission, which You 
yourself have entrusted to me, 0 Lord, in this life and in the life to come. 

1326 We are beginning an eight-day retreat today [2i5i lesus, my Master, help me to make these 
holy retreat exercises with the greatest fervor possible. May Your Spirit guide me, O God, 
into the most profound depths of knowledge of Yourself, and of my own self as well. For I 
shall love You only as much as I shall come to know You. And I shall despise myself only as 
much as I shall come to know my misery. I know, Lord, that You will not refuse me Your 
help. I desire to come out of this retreat a saint, even though human eyes will not notice 
this, not even those of the superiors. I abandon myself entirely to the action of Your grace. 
Let Your will be accomplished entirely in me, 0 Lord. 

1327 First day. Jesus: My daughter, this retreat will be an uninterrupted contemplation. I 
will bring you into this retreat as into a spiritual banquet. Close to My merciful 
Heart, you will meditate upon all the graces your heart has received, and a deep 
peace will accompany your soul. I want the eyes of your soul to be always fixed on 
My holy will, since it is in this way that you will please Me most. No sacrifices can 
be compared to this. Throughout all the exercises you will remain close to My 
Heart. You shall not undertake any reforms, because I will dispose of your whole 
life as I see fit. The priest who will preach the retreat will not speak a single word 
which will trouble you. 

1328 My Jesus, I have already made two meditations, and I recognize, through them, that 
everything You have said is true. I am experiencing a profound peace, and this peace flows 
from the witness of my conscience; that is to say, that I am always doing Your will, 0 Lord. 


1329 In the meditation on the goal of man, I understood that this truth is deeply rooted in my 
soul, and that my deeds are therefore the more perfect. I know why I was created. All 
creatures taken together cannot take the place, for me, of my Creator. I know that God is 
my ultimate goal and so, in whatever I undertake, I take God into account. 

1330 + Oh, how good it is to spend a retreat close to the most sweet heart of my God. I am in 
the wilderness with my Beloved. No one interrupts my sweet conversation with Him. 

1331 J esus, You yourself have deigned to lay the foundations of my sanctity, as my cooperation 
has not amounted to much. You have taught me to set no store on the use and choice of 
created things, because my heart is, of itself, so weak. And this is why I have asked You, 0 
my Master, to take no heed of the pain of my heart, but to cut I away whatever might hold 
me back from the path of love. I did not understand You, Lord, in times of sorrow, when 
You were effecting Your work in my soul; but today I understand You and rejoice in my 
freedom of spirit. Jesus himself has seen to it that my heart has not been caught in the 
snares of any passion. I have come to know well from what dangers He has delivered me, 
and therefore my gratitude to my God knows no bounds. 

1332 Second day. As I was meditating on the sin of the Angels and their immediate punishment, 

I asked J esus why the Angels had been punished as soon as they had sinned. I heard a 
voice: Because of their profound knowledge of God. No person on earth, even 
though a great saint, has such knowledge of God as an Angel has. Nevertheless, to

me who am so miserable, You have shown Your mercy, O God, and this, time and time 
again. You carry me in the bosom of Your mercy and forgive me every time that I ask Your 
forgiveness with a contrite heart. 

1333 Profound silence engulfs my soul. Not a single cloud hides the sun from me. I lay myself 
entirely open to its rays, that His love may effect a complete transformation in me. I want 
to come out of this retreat a saint, and this, in spite of everything; that is to say, in spite of 
my wretchedness, I want to become a saint, and I trust that God's mercy can make a saint 
even out of such misery as I am, because I am utterly in good will. In spite of all my 
defeats, I want to go on fighting like a holy soul and to comport myself like a holy soul. I 
will not be discouraged by anything, just as nothing can discourage a soul who is holy. I 
want to live and die like a holy soul, with my eyes fixed on You, Jesus, stretched out on the 
Cross, as the model for my actions. I used to look around me for examples and found 
nothing which sufficed, and I noticed that my state of holiness seemed to falter. But from 
now on, my eyes are fixed on You, 0 Christ, who are for me the best of guides. I am 
confident that You will bless my efforts. 

1334 + In the meditation on sin, the Lord gave me to know all the malice of sin and the 
ingratitude that is contained in it. I feel within my soul a great aversion for even the 
smallest sin. However, the eternal truths I have been meditating on do not bring even a 
shadow of disturbance or unrest into my soul. And although I take them very much to 
heart, my contemplation is not thereby interrupted. In this contemplation, it is not 
transports of the heart that I experience, but a depth of peace and a wonderful silence. 
Although my love is great, I experience an extraordinary equilibrium. Even receiving the 
Eucharist causes no feeling, but brings me to a depth of union where my love and God's 
love are fused together as one. 



1335 + Jesus has made known to me that I should pray for the sisters who are making the 
retreat. During prayer, I learned of the struggle that some are undergoing, and I redoubled 
my prayers. 

1336 + In this profound silence, I am better able to judge the condition of my soul. My soul is like 
clear water in which I can see everything: both my misery and the vastness of God's 
graces. And owing to this true knowledge of itself, my spirit is strengthened in deep 
humility. I expose my heart to the action of Your grace like a crystal exposed to the rays of 
the sun. May Your image be reflected in it, 0 my God, to the extent that it is possible to be 
reflected in the heart of a creature. Let Your divinity radiate through me, O You who dwell in 
my soul. 

1337 As I was praying before the Blessed Sacrament and greeting the five wounds of Jesus, at 
each salutation I felt a torrent of graces gushing into my soul, giving me a foretaste of 
heaven and absolute confidence in God's mercy. 

1338 As I write these words, I hear the cry of Satan: "She's 'writing everything, she's writing 
everything, and because of this we are losing so much! Do not write about the goodness of 
God; He is just!" And howling with fury, he vanished. 

1339 O merciful God, You do not despise us, but lavish Your graces on us continuously. You make 
us fit to enter ' Your kingdom, and in Your goodness You grant that human beings may fill 
the places vacated by the ungrateful angels. 0 God of great mercy, who turned Your sacred 
gaze away from the rebellious angels and turned it upon contrite man, praise and glory be 
to Your unfathomable mercy, 0 God who do not despise the lowly heart. 

1340 My J esus, despite these graces which You send upon me, I feel that my nature, ennobled 
thought it be, is not completely stilled; and so I keep a constant watch. I must struggle with 
many faults, knowing well that it is not the struggle which debases one, but cowardice and 
failure. 

1341 When one's health is poor, there is much one has to bear. For when one is ill, but not in 
bed, one is not considered to be ill. For many reasons, therefore, there are constant 
occasions for sacrifices, and sometimes big ones. I understand now that only in eternity will 
many things be revealed. But I also understand that if God demands a sacrifice, He does 
not withhold His grace, but gives it to the soul in abundance.

1342 My J esus, let my sacrifice burn before Your throne in all silence, but with the full force of 
love, as I beg You to have mercy on souls. 

1343 Third day. In the meditation on death, I prepared myself as if for real death. I examined my 
conscience and searched all my affairs at the approach of death and, thanks be to grace, 
my affairs were directed toward that ultimate goal. This filled my heart with great gratitude 
to God, and I resolved to serve my God even more faithfully in the future. One thing alone 
is necessary: to put my old self to death and to begin a new life. In the morning, I prepared 
to receive Holy Communion as if it were to be the last in my life, and after Holy Communion 
I brought before my imagination my actual death, and I said the prayers for the dying and 
then the De Profundis for my own soul. My body was lowered into the grave, and I said to 
my soul, "See what has become of your body, a heap of dirt teeming with vermin-that is 
your inheritance." 



1344 0 merciful God, who still allow me to live, give me strength that I may live a new life, the 
life of the spirit, over which death has no dominion. And with that, my heart was renewed, 
and I began a new life while still here on earth, a life of love of God. Nevertheless, I do not 
forget that I am weakness itself, though I do not doubt even for a moment that I will obtain 
the help of Your grace, O God. 

1345 + Fourth day. 0 Jesus, I have been feeling extraordinarily well, close to Your Heart, during 
this retreat. Nothing disturbs the depths of my peace. With one eye, I gaze on the abyss of 
my misery and with the other, on the abyss of Your mercy. 

1346 During Holy Mass, which was celebrated by Father Andrasz, I saw the I nfant J esus who, 
with hands outstretched toward us, was sitting in the chalice being used at Holy Mass. After 
gazing at me penetratingly, He spoke these words: As you see Me in this chalice, so I 
dwell in your heart. 

1347 + Holy Confession. After giving an account of my conscience, I was given the permissions I 
asked for: to wear the bracelet for half an hour every day during Holy Mass, and in times of 
difficulty, to wear the belt for two hours. [Father said,] "Sister, persevere in this great 
faithfulness to the Lord J esus. " 

1348 Fifth day. When I entered the chapel this morning, I learned that Mother Superior had had 
some trouble on my account. This hurt me very much. After Holy Communion, I leaned my 
head on the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus and said, "0 my Lord, I beg You, let all the 
consolation that I am experiencing through Your presence in my heart be poured out into 
the soul of my dear Mother Superior, who has had some trouble because of me, and this 
involuntarily on my part." 

1349 Jesus comforted me, saying that both our souls had benefited from this. But I begged the 
Lord to deign to spare me from being the occasion of anyone's suffering, as my heart could 
not bear this. 

1350 0 white Host, You preserve my soul in whiteness; I fear the day when I might forsake You. 
You are the Bread of Angels, and thus also the Bread of Virgins. 

1351 Jesus, my most perfect model, with my eyes fixed on You, I will go through life in Your 
footsteps, adapting nature to grace, according to Your most holy will and Your light which 
illumines my soul, trusting completely in Your help. 

+ 

J.M.J. 

1352 Chart of inner control [2i6i 
Particular examen. 

Unity with the merciful Christ. Because I am united to Jesus, I must be faithful always and 
everywhere, and I must be interiorly united with the Lord, while exteriorly observing fidelity 
to the rule, particularly that of silence. 

1353 See Chart 


1354 When I hesitate on how to act in some situations, I always ask love. It advises best. 

1355 See Chart 

1356 Sixth day. 0 my God, I am ready to accept Your will in every detail, whatever it may be. 
However You may direct me, I will bless You. Whatever You ask of me I will do with the 
help of Your grace. Whatever Your holy will regarding me might be, I accept it with my 
whole heart and soul, taking no account of what my corrupt nature tells me. 

1357 Once, when I was passing by a group of people, I asked the Lord if they were all in the 
state of grace, because I did not feel His sufferings. Because you do not feel My 
sufferings, it does not follow that they must all be in the state of grace. At times, I

allow you to be aware of the condition of certain souls, and I give you the grace of 
suffering solely because I use you as the instrument of their conversion. 

1358 Where there is genuine virtue, there must be sacrifice as well; one's whole life must be a 
sacrifice. It is only by means of sacrifice that souls can become useful. It is my self-sacrifice 
which, in my relationship with my neighbor, can give glory to God, but God's love must flow 
through this sacrifice, because everything is concentrated in this love and takes its value 
from it. 

1359 Bear in mind that when you come out of this retreat, I shall be dealing with you as 
with a perfect soul. I want to hold you in My hand as a pliant tool, perfectly 
adapted to the completion of My works. 

1360 0 Lord, You who penetrate my whole being and the most secret depths of my soul, You see 
that I desire You alone and long only for the fulfillment of Your holy will, paying no heed to 
difficulties or sufferings or humiliations or to what others might think. 

1361 This firm resolution to become a saint is extremely pleasing to Me. I bless your 
efforts and will give you opportunities to sanctify yourself. Be watchful that you 
lose no opportunity that My providence offers you for sanctification. If you do not 
succeed in taking advantage of an opportunity, do not lose your peace, but humble 
yourself profoundly before Me and, with great trust, immerse yourself completely 
in My mercy. I n this way, you gain more than you have lost, because more favor is 
granted to a humble soul than the soul itself asks for... 

1362 + Seventh day. I have come to a knowledge of my destiny; that is, an inward certainty that 
I will attain sanctity. This deep conviction has filled my soul with gratitude to God, and I 
have given back all the glory to God, because I know very well what I am of myself. 


1363 I am coming out of this retreat thoroughly transformed by God's love. My soul is beginning 
a new life, earnestly and courageously; although outwardly my life will not change, and no 
one will notice it, nevertheless, pure love is [now] the guide of my life and, externally, it is 
mercy which is its fruit. I feel that I have been totally imbued with God and, with this God, I 
am going back to my everyday life, so drab, tiresome and wearying, trusting that He whom 

I feel in my heart will change this drabness into my personal sanctity. 

In profound silence, close to Your merciful Heart, my soul is maturing during this retreat. In 
the clear rays of Your love, my soul has lost its tartness and has become a sweet and ripe 
fruit. 

1364 Now I can be wholly useful to the Church by my personal sanctity, which throbs with life in 
the whole Church, for we all make up one organism in J esus. That is why I endeavor to 
make the soil of my heart bear good fruit. Although the human eye may perhaps never see 
it, there will nevertheless come a day when it will become apparent that many souls have 
been fed and will continue to be fed with this fruit. 

1365 0 Eternal Love, who enkindle a new life within me, a life of love and of mercy, support me