 approached her with good will. That 
particular sister had tried to make my work more difficult to the point that, despite my 
efforts, she had sometimes succeeded in spoiling what had been well done, as she herself 
admitted to me at our parting, and for which she begged my pardon. I had not wanted to 
probe her intentions, but took it as a trial from God... 

633 I am greatly surprised at how one can be so jealous. When I see someone else's good, I 
rejoice at it as if it were mine. The joy of others is my joy, and the suffering of others is my 
suffering, for otherwise I would not dare to commune with the Lord J esus. The spirit of J esus 
is always simple, meek, sincere; all malice, envy, and unkindness disguised under a smile of 
good will are clever little devils. A severe word flowing from sincere love does not wound the 
heart. 

634 March 22, [1936]. When I arrived at Warsaw, I went into the small chapel for a moment to 
thank the Lord for a safe journey, and I asked the Lord to give me the assistance and the 
grace necessary for everything that was in store for me here. I submitted myself in all things 
to His holy will. I heard these words: Fear nothing; all difficulties will serve for the 
fulfillment of My will. 

635 March 25. In the morning, during meditation, God's presence enveloped me in a special way, 
as I saw the immeasurable greatness of God and, at the same time, His condescension to His 
creatures. Then I saw the Mother of God, who said to me, Oh, how pleasing to God is the 
soul that follows faithfully the inspirations of His grace! I gave the Savior to the world; as for 
you, you have to speak to the world about His great mercy and prepare the world for the 
Second Coming of Him who will come, not as a merciful Savior, but as a just Judge. Oh, how 
terrible is that day! Determined is the day of justice, the day of divine wrath. The angels 
tremble before it. Speak to souls about this great mercy while it is still the time for [granting] 
mercy. If you keep silent now, you will be answering for a great number of souls on that 
terrible day. Fear nothing. Be faithful to the end. I sympathize with you. 

636 When I arrived at Walendow, one of the sisters r 1331 gave me this welcome: "Sister, now that

you have come to us here, everything is going to be all right." I said to her, "Why do you say 
that, Sister?" She answered that she felt this in her soul. This particular person is full of 
simplicity and very pleasing to the Heart of Jesus. The house really was in dire straits 
[financially]. ...I shall not mention all of that here. 


637 Confession. As I was preparing for confession, I said to Jesus, hidden in the Blessed 

Sacrament, "J esus, I beg You to speak to me through the mouth of this priest. And this will 
be a sign to me, because he does not know at all that You want me to establish that 
Congregation of Mercy. Let him say something to me about this mercy." 

When I approached the confessional and started my confession, the priest interrupted me 
and started telling me about the great mercy of God, and he spoke more forcefully about it 
than I had ever heard anyone speak before. And he asked me, "Do you know that the mercy 
of the Lord is greater than all His works, that it is the crown of His works?" And I listened 
attentively to these words which the Lord was speaking through the mouth of the priest. 
Although I believe that it is always God who speaks through the lips of the priest in the 
confessional, I experienced it in a special way on that occasion. 

Although I did not reveal anything of the divine life which is in my soul and only accused 
myself of my offenses, the priest himself told me very much of what was in my soul and put 
me under obligation to be faithful to the inspirations of God. He said to me, "You are going 
through life with the Mother of God, who faithfully responded to every divine inspiration." 0 
my Jesus, who can ever comprehend Your goodness? 

638 Jesus, drive away from me the thoughts that are not in accord with Your will. I know that 
nothing now binds me to this earth but this work of mercy. 

639 Thursday. During the evening adoration, I saw Jesus scourged and tortured. He said to me, 

My daughter, I desire that even in the smallest things, you rely on your confessor. 
Your greatest sacrifices do not please Me if you practice them without the 
confessor's permission; on the other hand, the smallest sacrifice finds great value 
in My eyes, if it is done with his permission. The greatest works are worthless in My 
eyes if they are done out of self-will, and often they are not in accord with My will 
and merit punishment rather than reward. And on the other hand, even the 
smallest of your acts, done with the confessor's permission is pleasing in My eyes 
and very dear to Me. Hold firmly to this always. Be constantly on the watch, for 
many souls will turn back from the gates of hell and worship My mercy. But fear 
nothing, as I am with you. Know that of yourself you can do nothing. 

640 On the First Friday of the month, before Communion, I saw a large ciborium filled with sacred 
hosts. A hand placed the ciborium in front of me, and I took it in my hands. There were a 
thousand living hosts inside. Then I heard a voice, These are hosts which have been 
received by the souls for whom you have obtained the grace of true conversion 
during this Lent. That was a week before Good Friday. I spent the day in great interior 
recollection, emptying myself for the sake of souls. 

641 Oh, what joy it is to empty myself for the sake of immortal souls! I know that the grain of 
wheat must be destroyed and ground between millstones in order to become food. In the 
same way, I must become destroyed in order to be useful to the Church and souls, even 
though exteriorly no one will notice my sacrifice. O J esus, outwardly I want to be hidden, just 
like this little wafer wherein the eye perceives nothing, and yet I am a host consecrated to 
You. 



642 Palm Sunday. This Sunday, I experienced in a special way the sentiments of the most sweet 
Heart of J esus. My spirit was there where J esus was. I saw J esus riding on a donkey's foal, 
and the disciples and a great multitude with branches in their hands joyfully accompanying 
the Lord J esus. Some strewed them before His feet where He was riding, while others raised 
their branches in the air, leaping and jumping before the Lord and not knowing what to do 
for joy. And I saw another crowd which came out to meet J esus, likewise with joyful faces 
and with branches in their hands, and they were crying out unceasingly with joy. There were 
little children there also. But Jesus was very grave, and the Lord gave me to know how much

He was suffering at the time. And at that moment, I saw nothing but only J esus, whose Heart 
was saturated with ingratitude. 

643 Quarterly confession. Father Bukowski. When some inner force urged me again not to put off 
this matter, I was unable to find peace. I told the confessor, Father Bukowski, that I could 
not wait any longer. Father answered me, "Sister, this is an illusion. The Lord Jesus cannot 
be demanding this. You have made your perpetual vows. All this is an illusion. You are 
inventing some sort of heresy!" And he was shouting at me, almost at the top of his voice. I 
asked him whether all of this was an illusion, and He said, "Everything." "Then please tell me 
what course I must take." "Well, Sister, you must not follow any inspiration. You should get 
your mind off all this. You should pay no attention to what you hear in your soul and try to 
carry out your exterior duties well. Give no thought to these things and put them completely 
out of your mind." I answered, "Good, up to now, I have been following my conscience, but 
now that you direct me, Father, to pay no heed to my interior, I will cease to do so." Then he 
said, "If the Lord J esus tells you something again, please let me know, but you must take no 
action." I answered, "Very well; I will try to be obedient. "I do not know why Father was 
being so severe. 

644 644 When I left the confessional, a multitude of thoughts oppressed my soul. Why be 
sincere? What I have told is no sin, so I have no duty to tell it to the confessor. And again, 
what a relief that I do not have to heed my interior any more as long as things are all right 
on the outside. I do not have to pay attention to anything or to follow the inner voices that 
have often cost me so much humiliation. From now on, I will be free. And again, a strange 
pain seized my soul: can I not, then, commune with the One whom I desire so greatly? The 
One who is the whole strength of my soul? I began to cry out, "To whom shall I go, O J esus?" 
But from the moment of the confessor's prohibition, great darkness fell upon my soul. I 
feared lest I hear some inner voice, which would occasion the breaking of my confessor's 
prohibition. And then again, I die of longing for God. My interior is torn asunder, not having 
any will of its own, since it has been turned over completely to God. 

That was on Wednesday of Holy Week. The suffering intensified on Holy Thursday. When I 
came to make my meditation, I entered into a kind of agony. I did not feel the presence of 
God, but all the justice of God weighed heavily upon me. I saw myself as if knocked down for 
the sins of the world. Satan began to mock me, "See, now you will no longer strive to win 
souls; look how you've been paid! Nobody will believe you that Jesus demands this. See how 
much you are suffering now, and how much more you are going to suffer! After all, the 
confessor has now released you from all these things." Now I can live as I like, as long as 
things are all right outwardly. These dreadful thoughts tormented me throughout the whole 
hour. 

When it was almost time for Holy Mass, my heart was seized with pain; am I, then, to leave 
the Congregation? And since Father has told me that this is a kind of heresy, am I to fall 
away from the Church? I cried out to the Lord with a sorrowful interior cry, "Jesus, save me!" 



Still, not a single ray of light entered my soul, and I felt my strength failing, as if the body 
were separating itself from the soul. I submitted to the will of God and repeated, "O God, let 
whatever You have decided upon happen to me. Nothing in me is any longer my own." Then, 
suddenly, God's presence enveloped me and penetrated me through and through. This was 
just as I was receiving Holy Communion. A moment after Holy Communion, I lost all 
awareness of everything around me and of my whereabouts. 

645 Then I saw the Lord Jesus, as He is represented in the image, and He said to me, Tell the 
confessor that this work is Mine and that I am using you as a lowly instrument. And 
I said, "Jesus, I can no longer do anything You command me to do, because my confessor 
has told me that all this is an illusion, and that I am not allowed to obey any of Your 
commands. I will do nothing that You will tell me to do now. I am sorry, my Lord, but I am 
not allowed to do anything, and I must obey my confessor. Jesus, I most earnestly ask Your

pardon. You know how much I suffer because of this, but it can't be helped, Jesus. The 
confessor has forbidden me to follow Your orders." Jesus listened to my arguments and 
complaints with kindness and satisfaction. I thought the Lord Jesus would be grievously 
offended but, on the contrary, He was pleased and said to me kindly, Always tell your 
confessor about everything I say to you and command you to do, and do only that 
for which you obtain permission. Do not be upset, and fear nothing; I am with you. 
My soul was filled with joy, and all those oppressive thoughts vanished. Certitude and 
courage entered my soul. 

646 But after a short while, I entered into the sufferings which Jesus underwent in the Garden of 
Olives. This lasted until Friday morning. On Friday, I experienced the Passion of Jesus but, 
this time, in a different way. On that day, Father Bukowski came from Derdy. Some strange 
power pushed me to go to confession and tell him about everything that had happened to me 
and about what Jesus had said to me. When I told Father, he was quite different and he said 
to me, "Sister, don't be afraid of anything; you will come to no harm, for the ' Lord J esus will 
not allow it. If you are obedient and persevere in this disposition, you need not worry about 
anything. God will find a way to bring about His work. You should always have this simplicity 
and sincerity and tell everything to Mother General. What I said to ; you was said as a 
warning, because illusions may afflict even holy persons, and Satan's insinuations may play a 
part in this, and sometimes this comes from our own selves, so one has to be careful. And so 
continue as you have thus far. You can see, Sister, that the Lord is not angered by this. And 
Sister, you can repeat these things that have happened to you at present to your regular 
confessor [Father Sopocko]." 

647 From this, I came to understand one thing: that I must pray much for each of my confessors, 
that he might obtain the light of the Holy Spirit, for when I approach the confessional without 
first praying, fervently, the confessor does not understand me very well. Father encouraged 
me to pray fervently for these intentions, that God would give better knowledge and 
understanding of the things He is asking of me. "Make novena after novena, Sister, and God 
will not refuse the graces." 



648 Good Friday. At three o'clock, I saw the Lord Jesus, crucified, who looked at me and said, I 
thirst. Then I saw two rays issue from His side, just as they appear in the image. I then felt 
in my soul the desire to save souls and to empty myself for the sake of poor sinners. I 
offered myself, together with the dying Jesus, to the Eternal Father, for the salvation of the 
whole world. With Jesus, through Jesus and in Jesus is my communion with You, Eternal 
Father. On Good Friday, Jesus suffered in His soul in a way which was different from [His 
suffering on] Holy Thursday. 

649 Mass of the Resurrection. [April 12, 1936]. When I entered the chapel, my spirit was 
immersed in God, its only treasure. His presence flooded me. 

650 0 my Jesus, my Master and Director, strengthen and enlighten me in these difficult moments 
of my life. I expect no help from people; all my hope is in You. I feel alone in the face of Your 
demands, 0 Lord. Despite the fears and qualms of my nature, I am fulfilling Your holy will 
and desire to fulfill it as faithfully as possible throughout my life and in my death. Jesus, with 
You I can do all things. Do with me as You please; only give me Your merciful Heart and that 
is enough for me. 

0 Jesus my Lord, help me. Let what You have planned before all ages happen to me. I am 
ready at each beckoning of Your holy will. Enlighten my mind that I may know Your will. 0 
God, You who pervade my soul, You know that I desire nothing but Your glory. 

0 Divine Will, You are the delight of my heart, the food of my soul, the light of my intellect, 
the omnipotent strength of my will; for when I unite myself with Your will, 0 Lord, Your 
power works through me and takes the place of my feeble will. Each day, I seek to carry out 
God's wishes. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201 -250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-52] 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801 -850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1 001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1 201-1230

Notebook IV: 1231-1321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 - 1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 2 


651 0 incomprehensible God, how great is Your mercy! It surpasses the combined understanding 
of all men and angels. All the angels and all humans have emerged from the very depths of 
Your tender mercy. Mercy is the flower of love. God is love, and mercy is His deed. In love it 
is conceived; in mercy it is revealed. Everything I look at speaks to me of God's mercy. Even 
God's very justice speaks to me about His fathomless mercy, because justice flows from love. 

652 There is one word I heed and continually ponder; it alone is everything to me; I live by it and 
die by it, and it is the holy will of God. It is my daily food. My whole soul listens intently to 
God's wishes. I do always what God asks of me, although my nature often quakes and I feel 
that the magnitude of these things is beyond my strength. 1 know well what I am of myself, 
but I also know what the grace of God is, which supports me. 

653 April 25, 1936. Walendow. On that day, the suffering in my soul was more severe than ever 
before. From early morning, I felt as if my body and soul had separated. I felt that God's 
presence had penetrated my whole being; I felt all the justice of God within me; I felt I stood 
alone before God. I thought: one word from my spiritual director would set me entirely at 
peace; but what can I do?-he is not here. However, I decided to seek light in holy confession. 
When I uncovered my soul to the priest, ri34i he was afraid to continue hearing my 
confession, and that caused me even greater suffering. When I see that a priest is fearful, I 
do not obtain any inner peace. So I have decided that only to my spiritual director will I open 
my soul in all matters, from the greatest to the least, and that I will follow his directions 
strictly. 

654 Now I understand that confession is only the confessing of one's sins, and spiritual guidance 
is a different thing altogether. But this is not what I want to speak about. I want to tell about 
a strange thing that happened to me for the first time. When the confessor started talking to 
me, I did not understand a single word. Then I saw J esus Crucified and He said to me, 1 1 is 
in My Passion that you must seek light and strength. After the confession, I meditated 
on Jesus' terrible Passion, and I understood that what I was suffering was nothing compared 
to the Savior's Passion, and that even the smallest imperfection was the cause of this terrible 
suffering. Then my soul was filled with very great contrition, and only then I sensed that I 
was in the sea of the unfathomable mercy of God. Oh, how few words I have to express what 
I am experiencing! I feel I am like a drop of dew engulfed in the depths of the bottomless 
ocean of divine mercy. 


655 + May 11, 1936. I came to Cracow. I was happy that at last I shall be able to carry out all 
that the Lord J esus was demanding. 

Once, when I was speaking with Father A.... [Andrasz] and had told him everything, I 
received this answer: "Sister, pray till the day of the Feast of the Most Sacred Heart and add 
some mortification to the prayer, and on the Feast of the Sacred Heart I will give you an 
answer." But one day, I heard this voice in my soul: Fear nothing; I am with you. After 
these words, I felt such an urgency within me that, without waiting for the Feast of the 
Sacred Heart, I said during confession that I was going to leave the Congregation 
immediately. Father answered, "Sister, since you have made the decision by yourself, then 
take the responsibility for yourself. Go." I was happy to be leaving. 

The following morning, God's presence suddenly left me. A great darkness came over my 
soul. I could not pray. Because of this sudden loss of the presence of God, I decided to 
postpone the matter for a while, until I had talked with Father. 

Father A. [Andrasz] answered that such changes in souls were frequent, and that this was 
not an obstacle to action.

656 When I talked to Mother General [Michael] about everything that had happened to me, she 
said, "Sister, I am locking you in the tabernacle with the Lord Jesus; wherever you go from 
there, that will be the will of God." 

657 J une 19. When we went to the J esuits' place for theprocession of the Sacred Heart, during 
Vespers I saw the same rays coming forth from the Sacred Host, just as they are painted in 
the image. My soul was filled with great longing for God. 

June, 1936. Conversation with Father A. [Andrasz] 

658 "Know that these are hard and difficult things. Your principal spiritual director is the Holy 
Spirit. We can only give direction to these inspirations, but your real director is the Holy 
Spirit. If you yourself have decided to leave, Sister, I neither prohibit nor order you to do so. 
You take the responsibility for yourself. I say this to you, Sister: you can begin to take 
action. You are capable of doing so, and therefore you can do so. These things are indeed 
probable; all you have told me up to now [before perpetual vows in Cracow in 1933] speaks 
in favor of taking action. Still, you have to be very careful in all this. Pray much and ask that 
I be given light." 

659 During Holy Mass, offered by Father Andrasz, I saw the little I nfant J esus, who told me that I 
was to depend on him for everything; no action undertaken on your own, even though 
you put much effort into it, pleases Me. I understood this [need of] dependence. 

660 O my Jesus, on the day of the last judgment, You will demand from me an account of this 
work of mercy. 0 just J udge, but my Spouse as well, help me to do Your holy will. O mercy, 
O divine virtue! 

O most merciful Heart of Jesus, my Betrothed, make my heart like unto Yours. 

661 J uly 16. I spent this whole night in prayer. I meditated upon the Lord's Passion, and my soul 
was crushed by the burden of God's justice. The Hand of the Lord touched me. 



662 July 17. O my Jesus, You know how much adversity I encounter in this matter, how much 
reproach I must put up with, how many ironic smiles I must take with equanimity. Oh, alone 
I would not be able to survive this, but with You, my Master, I can do all things. Oh, how 
painfully an ironic smile wounds, especially when one [appears to] speak with great sincerity. 

663 J uly 22. 0 my J esus, I know that a person's greatness is evidenced by his deeds and not by 
his words or feelings. It is the works that have come from us that will speak about us. My 
Jesus, do not allow me to daydream, but give me the courage and strength to fulfill Your holy 
will. 

Jesus, if You wish to leave me in uncertainty, even to the end of my life, may Your Holy 
Name be blessed. 

J une. 

664 + 0 my J esus, how immensely I rejoice at the assurance You have given me that the 
Congregation will come into being. I no longer have the least shadow of a doubt about this, 
and I see how great is the glory which it will give to God. It will be the reflection of God's 
greatest attribute; that is, His divine mercy. Unceasingly, they will intercede for divine mercy 
for themselves and for the whole world. And every act of mercy will flow from God's love, 
that love with which they will be filled to overflowing. They will strive to make their own this 
great attribute of God, and to live by it and to bring others to know it and to trust in the 
goodness of the Lord. This Congregation of Divine Mercy will be in God's Church like a 
beehive in a magnificent garden, hidden and meek. The sisters will work like bees to feed 
their neighbors' souls with honey, while the wax will flame for the glory of God. 

+ J une 29, 1936. 

665 Father Andrasz told me to make a novena for the intention of knowing better the will of God. 

I prayed ardently, adding a certain bodily mortification. Towards the end of the novena, I 
received an inner light and the assurance that the Congregation will come into being and that 
it is pleasing to God. Despite the difficulties and adversities, complete peace and strength 
entered my soul from on high. I understood that nothing could resist or nullify the will of 
God. I understood that I must carry out this will of God despite obstacles, persecution and 
sufferings of all kinds, and despite natural repugnance and fear. 

666 I understood that all striving for perfection and all sanctity consist in doing God's will. Perfect

fulfillment of God's will is maturity in sanctity; there is no room for doubt here. To receive 
God's light and recognize what God wants of us and yet not do it is a great offense against 
the majesty of God. Such a soul deserves to be completely forsaken by God. It resembles 
Lucifer, who had great light, but did not do God's will. An extraordinary peace entered my 
soul when I reflected on the fact that, despite great difficulties, I had always faithfully 
followed God's will as I knew it. 0 J esus, grant me the grace to put Your will into practice as I 
have come to know it, 0 God. 

667 J uly 14. I received a letter at three o'clock [from Father Sopocko ri35i 1. 0 J esus, You alone 
know what I suffer, but I will keep silent and will not say anything about it to any creature, 
because I know that no one will comfort me. You are everything to me, 0 God, and Your holy 
will is my nourishment. I am living now on what I will live on in eternity. 

I have great reverence for Saint Michael the Archangel; he had no example to follow in doing 
the will of God, and yet he fulfilled God's will faithfully. 


668 + July 15. During Holy Mass, I offered myself completely to the heavenly Father through the 
sweetest Heart of Jesus; let Him do as He pleases with me. Of myself I am nothing, and in 
my misery I have nothing of worth; so I abandon myself into the ocean of Your mercy, O 
Lord. 

669 J uly 16. I am learning how to be good from J esus, from Him who is goodness itself, so that I 
may be called a daughter of the heavenly Father. This morning, when someone hurt my 
feelings, I tried, in that suffering, to unite my will to the will of God, and I praised God by my 
silence. In the afternoon, I went for a five-minute adoration, when suddenly I saw the 
crucifix I have on my breast come alive. Jesus said to me, My daughter, suffering will be 
a sign to you that I am with you. My soul was greatly moved by these words. 

670 O Jesus, my Master and my Director, it is only with You that I can converse. With no one else 
is it so easy to talk as with You, 0 God. 

671 In my spiritual life, I will always hold on to the priest's hand. About my soul's life and its 
needs, I will speak only with my confessor. 

672 + August 4, 1936. Inner torment for more than two hours. Agony.... Suddenly, God's 
presence pervades me and I feel as though I am coming under the power of the just God. His 
justice pervades me to the marrow; outwardly I lose strength and consciousness. With this, I 
come to know the great holiness of God and my own great misery. A great torment afflicts 
my soul; the soul perceives its deeds to be not without blemish. Then the strength of trust is 
awakened in the soul, which longs for God with all its might. Yet it sees how miserable it is 
and what utter vanity everything that surrounds it. And face to face with such holiness, Oh, 
poor soul.... 

August 13. 

673 I was tormented by terrible temptations all day; blasphemies thrust themselves upon my 
lips, and I felt an aversion for everything that is holy and godlike. Yet I struggled throughout 
the day. I n the evening, my mind became oppressed: what's the use of telling this to the 
confessor? He will ridicule it. A feeling of aversion and discouragement filled my soul, and it 
seemed to me that I could by no means receive Holy Communion in that condition. At the 
thought of not receiving Communion, such a terrible pain seized my soul that I almost cried 
aloud in the chapel. But I suddenly realized that the sisters were there and decided to go to 
the garden and hide myself there so as to be able to at least cry out loud. Then suddenly, 
Jesus stood by me and said, Where are you intending to go? 

674 I gave no answer to J esus, but poured out all my sorrow before Him, and Satan's attempts 
ceased. Jesus then said to me, The inner peace that you have is a grace, and suddenly 
He was gone. I felt happy and unaccountably peaceful. Really, for so much peace to return 
within a moment-that is a thing only Jesus can do, He, the most high Lord. 



675 + August 7, 1936. When I received the article] ri 36 i about Divine Mercy with the image [on 
the cover], God's presence filled me in an extraordinary way. When I steeped myself in a 
prayer of thanksgiving, I suddenly saw the Lord Jesus in a great brightness, just as He is 
painted, and at His feet I saw Father Andrasz and Father Sopocko. Both were holding pens in

their hands, and flashes of light and fire, like lightning, were coming from the tips of their 
pens and striking a great crowd of people who were hurrying I know not where. Whoever was 
touched by the ray of light immediately turned his back on the crowd and held out his hands 
to Jesus. Some returned with great joy, others with great pain and compunction. Jesus was 
looking at both priests with great kindness. After a while, I was left alone with Jesus, and I 
said, "Jesus, take me now, for Your will has already been accomplished." And Jesus 
answered, My will has not yet been completely accomplished in you; you will still 
suffer much, but I am with you; do not fear. 

676 I have been talking much with the Lord about Father Andrasz and also about Father Sopocko. 

I know that whatever I ask of the Lord He will not refuse me, and He will give them that for 
which I ask. I sensed and I know how greatly Jesus loves them. I am not writing about this 
in detail, but I know this, and it makes me very happy. 

August 15, 1936 

677 During a Mass celebrated by Father Andrasz, a moment before the Elevation, God's presence 
pervaded my soul, which was drawn to the altar. Then I saw the Mother of God with the 

I nfant J esus. The I nfant J esus was holding onto the hand of Our Lady. A moment later, the 
I nfant J esus ran with joy to the center of the altar, and the Mother of God said to me, See 
with what assurance I entrust Jesus into his hands. In the same way, you are to entrust your 
soul and be like a child to him. 

-After these words, my soul was filled with unusual trust. The Mother of God was clothed in a 
white dress, strangely white, transparent; on Her shoulders She had a transparent blue; that 
is, a blue-like mantle; with uncovered head [and] flowing hair, She was exquisite, and 
inconceivably beautiful. She was looking at Father with great tenderness, but after a 
moment, He broke up this beautiful Child, and living blood flowed forth. Father bent forward 
and received the true and living J esus into himself. Had he eaten Him? I do not know how 
this took place. Jesus, Jesus, I cannot keep up with You, for in an instant, You become 
incomprehensible to me. 

678 The essence of the virtues is the will of God. He who does the will of God faithfully, practices 
all the virtues. In all the events and circumstances of my life, I adore and bless the holy will 
of God. The holy will of God is the object of my love. In the most secret depths of my soul, I 
live according to His will. I act exteriorly according to what I recognize inwardly as the will of 
God. Sweeter to me are the torments, sufferings, persecutions and all manner of adversities 
by divine will than popularity, praise and esteem by my own will. 

679 Good night, my J esus; the bell is calling me to sleep. My J esus, You see that I am dying from 
the desire to save souls. Good night, my Beloved; I rejoice at being one day closer to 
eternity. And if You let me wake up tomorrow, J esus, I shall begin a new hymn to Your 
praise. 


680 + J uly 13. During meditation today, I came to understand that I should never speak about 
my own interior experiences, [but] that I should conceal nothing from my spiritual director; 
and I will especially ask God to enlighten my spiritual director. I attach greater importance to 
the words of my confessor than to all the lights taken together that I receive interiorly. 

681 + Amid the greatest torments, I fix the gaze of my soul upon Jesus Crucified; I do not expect 
help from people, but place my trust in God. In His unfathomable mercy lies all my hope. 

682 + The more I feel that God is transforming me, the more I desire to immerse myself in 
silence. The love of God is doing its work in the depths of my soul. I see that the mission 
which the Lord has entrusted to me is beginning. 

683 + Once, when I was praying fervently to the Jesuit Saints, I suddenly saw my Guardian 
Angel, who led me before the throne of God. I passed through great hosts of saints, and I 
recognized many of them, whom I knew from their pictures. I saw many Jesuits, who asked 
me from what congregation I was. When I answered they asked, "Who is your spiritual 
director?" I answered that it was Father A.... When they wanted to say more, my Guardian 
Angel beckoned me to be silent, and I came before the throne of God. I saw a great and 
inaccessible light, and I saw a place destined for me, close to God. But what it was like I do

not know, because a cloud covered it. However, my Guardian Angel said to me, "Here is your 
throne, for your faithfulness in fulfilling the will of God." 

684 + Holy Hour. -Thursday. During this hour of prayer, Jesus allowed me to enter the Cenacle, 
and I was a witness to what happened there. However, I was most deeply moved when, 
before the Consecration, Jesus raised His eyes to heaven and entered into a mysterious 
conversation with His Father. It is only in eternity that we shall really understand that 
moment. His eyes were like two flames; His face was radiant, white as snow; His whole 
personage full of majesty, His soul full of longing. At the moment of Consecration, love 
rested satiated-the sacrifice fully consummated. Now only the external ceremony of death 
will be carried out-external destruction; the essence [of it] is in the Cenacle. Never in my 
whole life had I understood this mystery so profoundly as during that hour of adoration. Oh, 
how ardently I desire that the whole world would come to know this unfathomable mystery! 

685 After the Holy Hour, when I went to my cell, I suddenly learned how greatly God was 
offended by a certain person, who was close to my heart. At the sight of this, my soul was 
pierced with pain, and I cast myself in the dust before the Lord, begging His mercy. For two 
hours, in tears, prayer and flagellation I prevented the sin, and I learned that God's mercy 
had embraced that poor soul. Oh, the price of one single sin! 

686 + September. First Friday. In the evening, I saw the Mother of God, with Her breast bared 
and pierced with a sword. She was shedding bitter tears and shielding us against God's 
terrible punishment. God wants to inflict terrible punishment on us, but He cannot because 
the Mother of God is shielding us. Horrible fear seized my soul. I kept praying incessantly for 
Poland, for my dear Poland, which is so lacking in gratitude for the Mother of God. If it were 
not for the Mother of God, all our efforts would be of little use. I intensified my prayers and 
sacrifices for our dear native land, but I see that I am a drop before the wave of evil. How 
can a drop stop a wave? 0 yes! A drop is nothing of itself, but with You, Jesus, I shall stand 
up bravely to the whole wave of evil and even to the whole of hell. Your omnipotence can do 
all things. 



687 Once, as I was going down the hall to the kitchen, I heard these words in my soul: Say 

unceasingly the chaplet that I have taught you. Whoever will recite it will receive 
great mercy at the hour of death. Priests will recommend it to sinners as their last 
hope of salvation. Even if there were a sinner most hardened, if he were to recite 
this chaplet only once, he would receive grace from My infinite mercy. I desire that 
the whole world know My infinite mercy. I desire to grant unimaginable graces to 
those souls who trust in My mercy. 

688 Jesus, Life and Truth, my Master, guide every step of my life, that I may act according to 
Your holy will. 

689 + On one occasion, I saw the throne of the Lamb of God and before the throne three Saints: 
Stanislaus Kostka, Andrew Bobola and Prince Casimir, who were interceding for Poland. All at 
once I saw a large book which stands before the throne, and it was given to me to read. The 
book was written in blood. Still, I could not read anything but the name, Jesus. Then I heard 
a voice which said to me, Your hour has not yet come. Then the book was taken away 
from me, and I heard these words: You will bear witness to My infinite mercy. In this 
book are written the names of the souls that have glorified My mercy. I was 
overwhelmed with joy at the sight of such great goodness of God. 

690 + On one occasion, I came to know of the condition of two religious sisters who were 
grumbling interiorly about an order the superior had given them, and for this reason God had 
withheld many special graces from them. My heart ached at this sight. How sad it is, 0 J esus, 
when we ourselves are the cause of the loss of graces. Whoever understands this is always 
faithful. 

691 + Thursday. Although I was very tired today, I nevertheless resolved to make a Holy Hour. I 
could not pray, nor could I remain kneeling, but I remained in prayer for a whole hour and 
united myself in spirit with those souls who are already worshiping God in the perfect way. 
But towards the end of the hour, I suddenly saw J esus, who looked at me penetratingly and

said with ineffable sweetness, Your prayer is extremely pleasing to Me. After these 
words, an unusual power and spiritual joy entered my soul. God's presence continued to 
pervade my soul. Oh, what happens to a soul that meets the Lord face to face, no pen has 
ever expressed or ever will express! 

692 + O Jesus, I understand that Your mercy is beyond all imagining, and therefore I ask You to 
make my heart so big that there will be room in it for the needs of all the souls living on the 
face of the earth. O Jesus, my love extends beyond the world, to the souls suffering in 
purgatory, and I want to exercise mercy toward them by means of indulgenced prayers. 

God's mercy is unfathomable and inexhaustible, just as God himself is unfathomable. Even if 
I were to use the strongest words there are to express this mercy of God, all this would be 
nothing in comparison with what it is in reality. O Jesus, make my heart sensitive to all the 
sufferings of my neighbor, whether of body or of soul. 0 my J esus, I know that You act 
toward us as we act toward our neighbor. 

My J esus, make my heart like unto Your merciful Heart. J esus, help me to go through life 
doing good to everyone. 



693 September 14, [1936]. The Archbishop [J albrzykowski] of Vilnius visited us. Although he 
stayed with us for a very short time, I still had a chance to talk with this worthy priest about 
the work of mercy. He showed himself very favorably disposed to this cause of mercy: 

"Sister, be completely at peace; if this is within the plans of divine providence, it will come 
about. I n the meantime, Sister, pray for a clearer outward sign. Let the Lord J esus give you a 
clearer knowledge of this. I beg you to wait a little while longer. The Lord Jesus will arrange 
the circumstances in such a way that everything will turn out all right." 

694 > September 19, 1936. When we left the doctor's r 1371 [office] and stepped into the 
sanatorium chapel for a moment, I heard these words in my soul: My child, just a few 
more drops in your chalice; it won't be long now. J oy filled my soul; this was the first 
call from my beloved Spouse and Master. My heart melted, and there was a moment when 
my soul was immersed in the whole sea of God's mercy. I felt that my mission was beginning 
in all its fullness. Death destroys nothing that is good. I pray most of all for souls that are 
experiencing inner sufferings. 

695 Once, I received light concerning two sisters. I understood that it is not possible for a person 
to act in the same manner towards everyone. There are some people who have a strange 
way of making friends with others. And then, as friends and under the pretext of that 
friendship, they manage to draw the person out, word by word. Then, when the right 
moment comes, they use those very same words to hurt that person. My Jesus, how strange 
is human frailty! Your love, Jesus, gives the soul this great prudence in its dealings with 
others. 

696 + September 24, 1936. 

Mother Superior [I rene] ordered me to say one decade of the rosary in place of all the other 
exercises, and to go to bed at once. As soon as I lay down I fell asleep, for I was very tired. 
But a while later, I was awakened by suffering. It was such a great suffering that it 
prevented me from making even the slightest movement; I could not even swallow my 
saliva. This lasted for about three hours. I thought of waking up the novice sister r i 38 i who 
shared my room, but then I thought, "She cannot give me any help, so let her sleep. It 
would be a pity to wake her. "I resigned myself completely to the will of God and thought 
that the day of my death, so much desired, had come. It was an occasion for me to unite 
myself with J esus, suffering on the Cross. Beyond that, I was unable to pray. When the 
suffering ceased, I began to perspire. But I still could not move, as the pain would return at 
each attempt. In the morning, I felt very tired, though I felt no further physical pain. Still, I 
could not get up to attend Mass. I thought to myself, if after such suffering death does not 
come, then how great the sufferings of death must be! 


697 Jesus, You know that I love suffering and want to drain the cup of suffering to the last drop; 
and yet, my nature experienced a slight shudder and fear. Quickly, however, my trust in the 
infinite mercy of God was awakened in all its force, and everything else had to give way

before it, like a shadow retreating before the sun's rays. 0 Jesus, how great is Your 
goodness! Your infinite goodness, so well known to me, enables me to bravely look death 
itself in the eye. I know that nothing will happen to me without God's permission. I desire to 
glorify Your infinite mercy during my life, at the hour of death, in the resurrection and 
throughout eternity. 

+ My Jesus, my strength, my peace, my repose; my soul bathes daily in the rays of Your 
mercy. There is nota moment in my life when I do not experience Your mercy, 0 God. I 
count on nothing in my whole life, but only on Your infinite mercy. It is the guiding thread of 
my life, 0 Lord. My soul is filled with God's mercy. 

698 + Oh, how sorely J esus is hurt by the ingratitude of a chosen soul! What a martyrdom it is 
for His unspeakable love! God loves us with the entire infinite Being that He is; and imagine, 
a miserable particle of dust scorns that love! My heart bursts with pain when I see this 
ingratitude. 

699 On one occasion, I heard these words: My daughter, tell the whole world about My 
inconceivable mercy. I desire that the Feast of Mercy [ 139 ] be a refuge and shelter 
for all souls, and especially for poor sinners. On that day the very depths of My 
tender mercy are open. I pour out a whole ocean of graces upon those souls who 
approach the fount of My mercy. The soul that will go to Confession and receive 
Holy Communion shall obtain complete forgiveness of sins and punishment. On that 
day all the divine floodgates through which grace flow are opened. Let no soul fear 
to draw near to Me, even though its sins be as scarlet. My mercy is so great that no 
mind, be it of man or of angel, will be able to fathom it throughout all eternity. 
Everything that exists has come forth from the very depths of My most tender 
mercy. Every soul in its relation to Me will contemplate My love and mercy 
throughout eternity. The Feast of Mercy emerged from My very depths of 
tenderness. It is My desire that it be solemnly celebrated on the first Sunday after 
Easter. Mankind will not have peace until it turns to the Fount of My Mercy. 

700 + Once, when I was very tired and in much pain, I told Mother Superior [Irene] about it and 
received the answer that I should get used to suffering. I listened to everything that Mother 
told me, and then I went out. Our Mother Superior has great love of neighbor and especially 
great love for the sick sisters, as everyone knows. And yet, as regards me, it is extraordinary 
that the Lord J esus has permitted that she not understand me and that she test me much in 
this respect. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251 -300 


301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-52] 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1 001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101- 1150 t 1 151-1200 t 1 201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-132 1 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 1450 t 145 1-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 


Notebook 2 


701 On this particular day, when I was feeling so bad and still went to work, every now and then 
I would feel sick. It was so very hot that, even without working, a person felt terrible, not to 
mention what it was like when one had to work while suffering. So, before noon, I 
straightened up from my work, looked up to the sky with great trust and said to the Lord, 

"J esus, cover the sun, for I cannot stand this heat any longer." And, O wonder, at that very 
moment a white cloud covered the sun and, from then on, the heat became less intense. 
When a little while later I began to reproach myself that I did not bear the heat, but begged 
for relief, Jesus himself put me at ease. 

702 August 13, 1936. Tonight God's presence is pervading me, and in an instant I come to know 
the great holiness of God. Oh, how the greatness of God overwhelms me! I then come to 
know the whole depth of my nothingness. This is a great torment, for this knowledge is

followed by love. The soul bounds forward vehemently toward God, and the two loves come 
face to face: the Creator and the creature; one little drop seeks to measure itself with the 
ocean. At first, the little drop wants to enclose the infinite ocean within itself; but at the 
same moment, it knows itself to be just one small drop, and thus it is vanquished, and it 
passes completely into God like a drop into the ocean. At first, this moment is a torment, but 
so sweet that, on experiencing it, the soul is happy. 

703 At present, the topic of my particular examen is my union with the Merciful Christ. This 
practice gives me unusual strength; my heart is always united with the One it desires, and its 
actions are regulated by mercy, which flows from love. 

704 I spend every free moment at the feet of the hidden God. He is my Master; I ask Him about 
everything; I speak to Him about everything. Here I obtain strength and light; here I learn 
everything; here I am given light on how to act toward my neighbor. From the time I left the 
novitiate, I have enclosed myself in the tabernacle together with Jesus, my Master. He 
himself drew me into the fire of living love on which everything converges. 

705 September 25. I suffer great pain in my hands, feet and side, the places where Jesus' body 
was pierced. I experience these pains particularly when I meet with a soul who is not in the 
state of grace. Then I pray fervently that the mercy of God will embrace that soul. 

706 [September] 29. On the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, I saw by my side that great 
Leader, who spoke these words to me: "The Lord has ordered me to take special care of you. 
Know that you are hated by evil; but do not fear-'Who is like God!"' And he disappeared. But 
I feel his presence and assistance. 

707 October 2, 1936. The First Friday of the month. After Holy Communion, I suddenly saw the 
Lord Jesus, who spoke these words to me: Now I know that it is not for the graces or 
gifts that you love me, but because My will is dearer to you than life. That is why I 
am uniting myself with you so intimately as with no other creature. 



708 At that moment, J esus disappeared. My soul was filled with the presence of God. I know that 
the gaze of the Mighty One rests upon me. I plunged myself completely in the joy that flows 
from God. I continued throughout the whole day without interruption, thus immersed in God. 
In the evening, I fell as if into a faint and a strange sort of agony. My love wants to equal the 
love of the Mighty One. It is drawn to Him so vehemently that it is impossible, without some 
special grace from God, to bear the vastness of such a grace in this life. But I see clearly that 
J esus himself is sustaining me and strengthening me and making me capable of communing 
with Him. In all this, the soul is particularly active. 

709 October 3, 1936. During the rosary today, I suddenly saw a ciborium with the Blessed 
Sacrament. The ciborium was uncovered and quite filled with hosts. From the ciborium came 
a voice: These hosts have been received by souls converted through your prayer and 
suffering. At this point, I felt God's presence as a child would; I felt strangely like a child. 

710 When one day I felt I would be unable to carry on till nine and asked S.N. r 1401 for something 
to eat, because I was going to bed earlier as I was not feeling well, S.N. answered, "But you 
are not ill, Sister; they only wanted you to have some rest, so they made up the illness." 0 
my J esus, my illness is so far advanced ri4ii that the doctor has separated me from the 
sisters to prevent them from becoming infected, and yet one is judged in this way. But that's 
good; all this is for You, my Jesus. I do not want to write much about external matters, for 
they are not the reason for my writing; I want in particular to note the graces granted me by 
the Lord, because these are not only for me, but for many other souls as well. 

711 October 5, [1936]. Today I received a letter from Father Sopocko. I learned that he intends 
to publish a holy card of the Merciful Christ. He asked me to send him a certain prayer r 1421 
which he wants to put on the back, if he receives the Archbishop's approbation. Oh, what 
great joy fills my heart that God has let me see this work of His mercy! How great is this 
work of the Most High God! I am but His instrument. Oh, how ardently I desire to see this

Feast of the Divine Mercy which God is demanding through me. But if it is the will of God that 
it be celebrated solemnly only after my death, even so I rejoice in it already, and I celebrate 
it interiorly with my confessor's permission. 

712 + I saw Father Andrasz today, kneeling and engulfed in prayer, and suddenly Jesus stood by 
him and, holding out both hands over his head, He said to me:- He will lead you through; 
do not fear. 

713 October 11. This evening, as I was writing about this great mercy of God and its great 
advantage to souls, Satan rushed into my room with