 going to the refectory and, since the 
kitchen, refectory and Sister Aloysia's little room are all close to each other, I asked Mother 
Superior to come into Sister Aloysia's room and told her of the wish of the Lord J esus. At 
that, Mother answered, "I will not permit you to wear any hair shirt. Absolutely not! If the 
Lord Jesus were to give you the strength of a colossus, I would then permit those 
mortifications." 

I apologized for taking up Mother's time and left the room. At that very moment I saw Jesus 
standing at the kitchen door, and I said to Him, "You commanded me to ask for these 
mortifications, but Mother Superior will not permit them." Jesus said, I was here during 
your conversation with the Superior and know everything. I don't demand 
mortification from you, but obedience. By obedience you give great glory to Me 
and gain merit for yourself. 



29 One of the Mothers [probably Mother Jane], when she learned about my close relationship 
with the Lord J esus, told me that I must be deluding myself. She told me that the Lord 
Jesus associates in this way only with the saints and not with sinful souls "like you, Sister!" 
After that, it was as if I mistrusted Jesus. In one of my morning talks with Him I said, 

"Jesus, are You not an illusion?" Jesus answered me, My love deceives no one. 

30 +On one occasion I was reflecting on the Holy Trinity, on the essence of God. I absolutely 
wanted to know and fathom who God is. ... In an instant my spirit was caught up into what 
seemed to be the next world. I saw an inaccessible light, and in this light what appeared 
like three sources of light which I could not understand. And out of that light came words in 
the form of lightning which encircled heaven and earth. Not understanding anything, I was 
very sad. Suddenly, from this sea of inaccessible light came our dearly beloved Savior, 
unutterably beautiful with His shining Wounds. And from this light came a voice which said, 
Who God is in His Essence, no one will fathom, neither the mind of Angels nor of 
man. Jesus said to me, Get to know God by contemplating His attributes. A moment 
later, He traced the sign of the cross with His hand and vanished." 

31 31 +Once I saw a big crowd of people in our chapel, in front of the chapel and in the street, 
because there was no room for them inside, lih The chapel was decorated for a feast. There 
were a lot of clergy near the altar, and then our sisters and those of many other 
congregations. They were all waiting for the person who was to take a place on the altar. 
Suddenly I heard a voice saying that I was to take the place on the altar. But as soon as I 
left the corridor to go across the yard and enter the chapel, following the voice that was 
calling me, all the people began to throw at me whatever they had to hand: mud, stones, 
sand, brooms, to such an extent that I at first hesitated to go forward. But the voice kept 
on calling me even more earnestly, so I walked on bravely.

When I entered the chapel, the superiors, the sisters, the students, [201 and even my parents 
started to hit me with whatever they could, and so whether I wanted to or not, I quickly 
took my place on the altar. As soon as I was there, the very same people, the students, the 
sisters, the superiors and my parents all began to hold their arms out to me asking for 
graces; and as for me, I did not bear any grudge against them for having thrown all sorts of 
things at me, and I was surprised that I felt a very special love precisely for those persons 
who had forced me to go more quickly to my appointed place. At the same time my soul 
was filled with ineffable happiness, and I heard these words, Do whatever you wish, 
distribute graces as you will, to whom you will and when you will. Then, instantly, 
the vision disappeared. 

32 Another time I heard these words, Go to the Superior and ask her to allow you to 
make a daily hour of adoration for nine days. During this adoration try to unite 
yourself in prayer with My Mother. Pray with all your heart in union with Mary, and 
try also during this time to make the Way of the Cross. I received the permission, 
though not for a full hour, but only for whatever time was left me after I had carried out my 
duties. 


33 I was to make this novena for the intention of my Motherland. On the seventh day of the 
novena I saw, between heaven and earth, the Mother of God, clothed in a bright robe. She 
was praying with Her hands folded on Her bosom, Her eyes fixed on Heaven. From Her 
Heart issued forth fiery rays, some of which were turned toward Heaven while the others 
were covering our country. 

34 When I told this and certain other things to my confessor, mi he replied that these might 
really be coming from God, but that they might also be an illusion. Because of my frequent 
changes [of assignments], I did not have a permanent confessor and besides, I had great 
difficulty in speaking of these things. I prayed ardently that the Lord would give me that 
great grace- that is, a spiritual director. But my prayer was answered only after my 
perpetual vows, when I went to Vilnius. The priest was Father Sopocko.mi God had allowed 
me to see him in an interior vision even before I came to Vilnius. mi 

35 Oh, if only I had had a spiritual director from the beginning, then I would not have wasted 
so many of God's graces. A confessor can help a soul a great deal, but he can also cause it 
a lot of harm. Oh, how careful confessors should be about the work of God's grace in their 
penitents' souls! This is a matter of great importance. By the graces given to a soul, one 
can recognize the degree of its intimacy with God. 

36 Once I was summoned to the judgment [seat] of God. I stood alone before the Lord. J esus 
appeared such as we know Him during His Passion. After a moment, His wounds 
disappeared except for five, those in His hands, His feet and His side. Suddenly I saw the 
complete condition of my soul as God sees it. I could clearly see all that is displeasing to 
God. I did not know that even the smallest transgressions will have to be accounted for. 
What a moment! Who can describe it? To stand before the Thrice- Holy God! Jesus asked 
me, Who are you? I answered, "I am Your servant, Lord." You are guilty of one day of 
fire in purgatory. I wanted to throw myself immediately into the flames of 
purgatory, but Jesus stopped me and said. Which do you prefer, suffer now for one 
day in purgatory or for a short while on earth? I replied, "Jesus, I want to suffer in 
purgatory, and I want to suffer also the greatest pains on earth, even if it were until the end 
of the world." J esus said, One [of the two] is enough; you will go back to earth, and 
there you will suffer much, but not for long; you will accomplish My will and My 
desires, and a faithful servant of Mine will help you to do this. Now, rest your head 
on My bosom, on My heart, and draw from it strength and power for these 
sufferings, because you will find neither relief nor help nor comfort anywhere else. 
Know that you will have much, much to suffer, but don't let this frighten you; I am 
with you. 

37 Soon afterwards I became NI.lml Physical weakness was for me a school of patience. Only 
Jesus knows how many efforts of will I had to make to fulfill my dutv.[25i 


38 In order to purify a soul, Jesus uses whatever instruments He likes. My soul underwent a

complete abandonment on the part of creatures; often my best intentions were 
misinterpreted by the sisters, i 26 j a type of suffering which is most painful; but God allows it, 
and we must accept it because in this way we become more like J esus. There was one thing 
which I could not understand for a long time: Jesus ordered me to tell everything to my 
Superiors, but my Superiors did not believe what I said and treated me with pity as though 

I were being deluded or were imagining things. 

Because of this, believing myself to be deluded, I resolved to avoid God interiorly for fear of 
these illusions. But the grace of God pursued me at every step, and God spoke to me when 
I least expected it. 

39 + One day Jesus told me that He would cause a chastisement to fall upon the most beautiful 
city in our country [probably Warsaw]. This chastisement would be that with which God had 
punished Sodom and Gomorrah . \rn I saw the great wrath of God and a shudder pierced my 
heart. I prayed in silence. After a moment, Jesus said to me, My child, unite yourself 
closely to Me during the Sacrifice and offer My Blood and My Wounds to My Father 
in expiation for the sins of that city. Repeat this without interruption throughout 
the entire Holy Mass. Do this for seven days. On the seventh day I saw Jesus in a 
bright cloud and began to beg Him to look upon the city and upon our whole country. Jesus 
looked [down] graciously. When I saw the kindness of Jesus, I began to beg His blessing. 

I mmediately J esus said, For your sake I bless the entire country. And He made a big 
sign of the cross over our country. Seeing the goodness of God, a great joy filled my soul. 

40 +The year 1929. Once during Holy Mass, I felt in a very special way the closeness of God, 
although I tried to turn away and escape from Him. On several occasions I have run away 
from God because I did not want to be a victim of the evil spirit; since others have told me, 
more than once, that such is the case. And this incertitude lasted for quite some time. 

During Holy Mass, before Communion, we had the renewal of vows. When we had left our 
kneelers and had started to recite the formula for the vows, Jesus appeared suddenly at my 
side clad in a white garment with a golden girdle around His waist, and He said to me, I 
give you eternal love that your purity may be untarnished and as a sign that you 
will never be subject to temptations against purity. Jesus took off His golden cincture 
and tied it around my waist. 

Since then I have never experienced any attacks against this virtue, either in my heart or in 
my mind. I later understood that this was one of the greatest graces which the Most Holy 
Virgin Mary had obtained for me, as for many years I had been asking this grace of Her. 
Since that time I have experienced an increasing devotion to the Mother of God. She has 
taught me how to love God interiorly and also how to carry out His holy will in all things. 0 
Mary, You are joy, because through You God descended to earth [and] into my heart. 

41 On one occasion I saw a servant of God in the immediate danger of committing a mortal 
sin. I started to beg God to deign to send down upon me all the torments of hell and all the 
sufferings He wished if only this priest would be set free and snatched from the occasion of 
committing a sin. Jesus heard my prayer and, that very instant, I felt a crown of thorns on 
my head. The thorns penetrated my head with great force right into my brain. This lasted 
for three hours; the servant of God was set free from this sin, and his soul was 
strengthened by a special grace of God. 


42 +Once, on Christmas Day [ 1928], I felt the omnipotence and the presence of God 
surrounding me. And once more I fled from this interior meeting with the Lord. I asked 
Mother Superior for permission to go to J ozefinek [ 28 i to visit the sisters there. The Superior 
gave us permission, and we started to get ready right after lunch. The other sisters were 
already waiting for me at the door of the convent while I ran to my cell to get my cloak. On 
my way back, as I was passing close to the little chapel, I saw Jesus standing in the 
doorway. He said to me, Go ahead, but I am taking your heart. Suddenly I felt that I 
had no heart in my chest. But the sisters were scolding me for lingering behind, saying that 
it was already getting late, so I quickly went along with them. But a sense of uneasiness

troubled me, and a strange longing invaded my soul, though no one knew what was 
happening except God. 

After we had been at J ozefinek for only a few minutes, I said to the sisters, "Let's go back 
home." The sisters asked for at least a moment's rest, but my spirit could find no peace. I 
explained that we must return before dark; and in as much as we had quite a distance to 
go, we immediately returned home. When Mother Superior met us in the hallway she asked 
me, "Haven't the sisters gone yet, or have they already returned?" I said that we had 
already returned because I did not want to be returning in the evening. I took off my cloak 
and immediately went to the little chapel. As soon as I entered J esus said to me, Go to 
Mother Superior and tell her that you came back, not in order to reach home 
before dark, but because I had taken your heart. Even though this was very difficult 
for me, I went to the Superior, and I told her frankly the real reason why I had come back 
so soon, and I asked pardon of the Lord for everything that had displeased Him. And then 
Jesus filled me with great joy. I understood that apart from God there is no contentment 
anywhere. 

43 On one occasion I saw two sisters who were about to enter hell. A terrible agony tore my 
soul; I prayed to God for them, and Jesus said to me, Go to Mother Superior and tell her 

that those two sisters are in danger of committing a mortal sin. The next day I told 
this to the Superior. One of them had already repented with great fervor and the other was 
going through a great struggle. 

44 One day J esus said to me, I am going to leave this house... because there are things 
here which displease Me. And the Host came out of the tabernacle and came lo rest in 
my hands and I, with joy, placed it back in the tabernacle. This was repeated a second time, 
and I did the same thing. Despite this, it happened a third time, but the Host was 
transformed into the living Lord J esus, who said to me, I will stay here no longer! At this, 
a powerful love for Jesus rose up in my soul. I answered, "And I, I will not let You leave this 
house, Jesus!" And again Jesus disappeared while the Host remained in my hands. Once 
again I put it back in the chalice and closed it up in the tabernacle. And Jesus stayed with 
us. I undertook to make three days of adoration by way of reparation. 

45 Once Jesus said to me, Tell Mother General [Michael] that in this house ... such and such a 
thing is being committed ... which displeases Me and offends Me greatly. I did not tell this to 
Mother right away, but the uneasiness which the Lord made me feel did not permit me to 
wait a minute longer, and I wrote immediately to Mother General, and peace returned to my 
soul. 


46 I often felt the Passion of the Lord J esus in my body, although this was imperceptible [to 
others], and I rejoiced in it because J esus wanted it so. But this lasted for only a short time. 
These sufferings set my soul afire with love for God and for immortal souls. Love endures 
everything, love is stronger than death, love fears nothing... 

+February 22, 1931 

47 In the evening, when I was in my cell, I saw the Lord Jesus clothed in a white garment. One 
hand [was] raised in the gesture of blessing, the other was touching the garment at the 
breast. From beneath the garment, slightly drawn aside at the breast, there were 
emanating two large rays, one red, the other pale. In silence I kept my gaze fixed on the 
Lord; my soul was struck with awe, but also with great joy. After a while, Jesus said to me, 
Paint an image according to the pattern you see, with the signature: Jesus, I trust 
in You. I desire that this image be venerated, first in your chapel, and [then] 
throughout the world. 

48 I promise that the soul that will venerate this image will not perish. I also promise 
victory over [its] enemies already here on earth, especially at the hour of death. I 
Myself will defend it as My own glory. 

49 When I told this to my confessor, 1291 1 received this for a reply: "That refers to your soul." 

He told me, "Certainly, paint God's image in your soul." When I came out of the 
confessional, I again heard words such as these: My image already is in your soul. I 
desire that there be a Feast of Mercy. I want this image, which you will paint with 
a brush, to be solemnly blessed on the first Sunday after Easter; that Sunday is to 
be the Feast of Mercy.

50 +1 desire that priests proclaim this great mercy of Mine towards souls of sinners. 
Let the sinner not be afraid to approach Me. The flames of mercy are burning Me - 
clamoring to be spent; I want to pour them out upon these souls. 

J esus complained to me in these words, Distrust on the part of souls is tearing at My 
insides. The distrust of a chosen soul causes Me even greater pain; despite My 
inexhaustible love for them they do not trust Me. Even My death is not enough for 
them. Woe to the soul that abuses these [gifts]. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201 -250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451 -500 t 501-52] 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1 001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1 201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-132 1 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 - 1450 t 1451 -1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 


Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 


Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 1 


51 When I spoke about this to Mother Superior [Rose,[3oi telling her] that God had asked this of 
me, she answered that Jesus should give some sign so that we could recognize Him more 
clearly. 

When I asked the Lord J esus for a sign as a proof "that You are truly my God and Lord and 
that this request comes from You," I heard this interior voice, I will make this all clear to 
the Superior by means of the graces which I will grant through this image. 

52 When I tried to run away from these interior inspirations, God said to me that on the day of 
judgment He would demand of me a great number of souls. 

Once, exhausted because of these various difficulties t hat had befallen me because of what 
J esus had said to me and what He had demanded of me for the painting of this image, I 
made up my mind to approach Father Andrasz im before my perpetual vows, and to ask him 
to dispense me from all these interior inspirations and from the duty of painting this image. 
After having heard my confession, Father Andrasz gave me this answer: "I will dispense you 
from nothing, Sister; it is not right for you to turn away from these interior inspirations, but 
you must absolutely-and I say, absolutely-speak about them to your confessor; otherwise 
you will go astray despite the great graces you are receiving from God. 

53 For the present you are coming to me for confession, but understand, Sister, that you must 
have a permanent confessor; that is to say, a spiritual director." 

I was very upset by this. I thought that I would get myself free from everything, and it 
turned out quite the opposite-an explicit command to follow the requests of Jesus. And now, 
still another torment, as I had no permanent confessor. Even if I went to the same confessor 
for a certain period of time, I could not open my soul to him in respect to these graces, and 
this caused me ineffable pain. So I asked Jesus to give these graces to someone else, 
because I did not know how to make use of them and was only wasting them. "Jesus, have 
mercy on me; do not entrust such great things to me, as You see that I am a bit of dust and 
completely inept." 

But the goodness of Jesus is infinite; He had promised me visible help here on earth, and a 
little while later I received it in Vilnius, in the person of Father Sopocko. I had already known 
him before coming to Vilnius, thanks to an interior vision. One day I saw him in our chapel 
between the altar and the confessional and suddenly heard a voice in my soul say, This is 
the visible help for you on earth. He will help you carry out My will on earth. 


54 +One day, tired out with all these uncertainties, I asked J esus, "J esus, are You my God or 
some kind of phantom? Because my Superiors say that there are all sorts of illusions and 
phantoms. If You are my Lord, I beg You to bless me." Then J esus made a big sign of the 
cross over me and I , too, signed myself. When I asked pardon of J esus for this question, He 
replied that I had in no way displeased Him by this question and that my confidence pleased 
Him very much.

55 1933. Spiritual Counsel Given Me by Father Andrasz, S.J. 

First : You must not turn away from these interior inspirations, but always tell everything to 
your confessor. If you recognize that these interior inspirations refer to your own self; that is 
to say, they are for the good of your soul or for the good of other souls, I urge you to follow 
them; and you must not neglect them, but always do so in consultation with your confessor. 

Second : If these inspirations are not in accord with the faith or the spirit of the Church, they 
must be rejected immediately as coming from the evil spirit. 

Third : If these inspirations do not refer to souls, in general, nor specifically to their good, you 
should not take them too seriously, and it would be better to even ignore them. 

But you should not make this decision by yourself, either one way or the other, as you can 
easily be led astray despite these great favors from God. Humility, humility, and ever 
humility, as we can do nothing of ourselves; all is purely and simply God's grace. 

You say to me that God demands great trust from souls; well then, you be the first to show 
this trust. And one more word-accept all this with serenity. 

Words of one of the confessors: "Sister, God is preparing many special graces for you, but 
try to make your life as clear as crystal before the Lord, paying no attention to what anyone 
else thinks about you. Let God suffice you; He alone." 

Toward the end of my novitiate, a confessor [perhaps Father Theodore] told me: "Go through 
life doing good, so that I could write on its pages: ' She spent her life doing good. 1 May God 
bring this about in you." 

Another time the confessor said to me, "Comport yourself before God like the widow in the 
Gospel; although the coin she dropped into the box was of little value, it counted far more 
before God than all the big offerings of others." 

On another occasion the instruction I received was this: " Act in such a way that all those 
who come in contact with you will go away joyful. Sow happiness about you because you 
have received much from God; give, then, generously to others. They should take leave of 
you with their hearts filled with joy, even if they have no more than touched the hem of your 
garment. Keep well in mind the words I am telling you right now." 

Still another time he gave me the following recommendation: "Let God push your boat out 
into the deep waters, toward the unfathomable depths of the interior life." 

Here are a few words from a conversation I had with the Mother Directress [Mary Joseph] 
toward the end of my novitiate: "Sister, let simplicity and humility be the characteristic traits 
of your soul. Go through life like a little child, always trusting, always full of simplicity and 
humility, content with everything, happy in every circumstance. There, where others fear, 
you will pass calmly along, thanks to this simplicity and humility. Remember this, Sister, for 



your whole life: as waters flow from the mountains down into the valleys, so, too, do God's 
graces flow only into humble souls." 

56 0 my God, I understand well that You demand this spiritual childhood[32i of me, because You 
are constantly asking it of me through Your representatives. 

At the beginning of my religious life, suffering and adversities frightened and disheartened 
me. So I prayed continuously, asking Jesus to strengthen me and to grant me the power of 
His Holy Spirit that I might carry out His holy will in all things, because from the beginning I 
have been aware of my weakness. I know very well what I am of myself, because for this 
purpose Jesus has opened the eyes of my soul; I am an abyss of misery, and hence I 
understand that whatever good there is in my soul consists solely of His holy grace. The 
knowledge of my own misery allows me, at the same time, to know the immensity of Your 
mercy. In my own interior life, I am looking with one eye at the abyss of my misery and 
baseness, and with the other, at the abyss of Your mercy, 0 God. 

57 0 my J esus, You are the life of my life. You know only too well that I long for nothing but the 
glory of Your Name and that souls come to know Your goodness. Why do souls avoid You, 
Jesus?-I don't understand that. Oh, if I could only cut my heart into tiny pieces and in this 
way offer to You, 0 Jesus, each piece as a heart whole and entire, to make up in part for the

hearts that do not love You! I love You, Jesus, with every drop of my blood, and I would 
gladly shed my blood for You to give You a proof of the sincerity of my love. O God, the more 
I know You the less I can comprehend You, but this "non-comprehension" lets me realize 
how great You are! And it is this impossibility of comprehending You which enflames my 
heart anew for You, 0 Lord. From the moment when You let me fix the eyes of my soul on 
You, 0 Jesus, I have been at peace and desired nothing else. I found my destiny at the 
moment when my soul lost itself in You, the only object of my love. In comparison with you, 
everything is nothing. Sufferings, adversities, humiliations, failures and suspicions that have 
come my way are splinters that keep alive the fire of my love for You, 0 Jesus. 

My desires are mad and unattainable. I wish to conceal from You that I suffer. I want never 
to be rewarded for my efforts and my good actions. You yourself, Jesus, are my only reward; 
You are enough, 0 Treasure of my heart! I want to share compassionately in the sufferings 
of my neighbors and to conceal my own sufferings, not only from them, but also from You, 

J esus. 

Suffering is a great grace; through suffering the soul becomes like the Savior; in suffering 
love becomes crystallized; the greater the suffering, the purer the love. 

58 +One night, a sister who had died two months previously came to me. She was a sister of 
the first choir. I saw her in a terrible condition, all in flames with her face painfully distorted. 
This lasted only a short time, and then she disappeared. A shudder went through my soul 
because I did not know whether she was suffering in purgatory or in hell. Nevertheless I 
redoubled my prayers for her. The next night she came again, but I saw her in an even more 
horrible state, in the midst of flames which were even more intense, and despair was written 
all over her face. I was astonished to see her in a worse condition after the prayers I had 
offered for her, and I asked, "Haven't my prayers helped you?" She answered that my 
prayers had not helped her and that nothing would help her. I said to her, "And the prayers 
which been any help to you?" She said no, that these prayers had helped some other souls. I 
replied, "If my prayers are not helping you, Sister, please stop coming to me." She 
disappeared at once. Despite this, I kept on praying. 


After some time she came back again to me during the night, but already her appearance 
had changed. There were no longer any flames, as there had been before, and her face was 
radiant, her eyes beaming with joy. She told me that I had a true love for my neighbor and 
that many other souls had profited from my prayers. She urged me not to cease praying for 
the souls in purgatory, and she added that she herself would not remain there much longer. 
How astounding are the decrees of God! 

59 1933. On one occasion I heard these words in my soul, Make a novena for your country. 
This novena will consist of the recitation of the Litany of the Saints. Ask your 
confessor for permission [probably Father Sopocko or Father Andrasz]. 

60 I received permission at my next confession and began the novena that very evening. 
Towards the end of the litany I saw a great radiance and, in the midst of it, God the Father. 
Between this radiance and the earth I saw Jesus, nailed to the Cross in such a way that when 
God wanted to look at the earth, He had to look through the wounds of Jesus. And I 
understood that it was for the sake of Jesus that God blesses the earth. 

61 O Jesus, I thank you for this great grace; namely, that You yourself have deigned to choose 
a confessor for me, and that You had made him known to me in a vision even before I had 
met him [Father Sopocko]. When I went to confession to Father Andrasz, I thought that I 
would be released from following these interior inspirations. Father replied that he could not 
dispense me from this, "but pray, Sister, that you be given a spiritual director." 

After a short but fervent prayer, I saw Father Sopocko for a second time, in our chapel, 
between the confessional and the altar. I was in Cracow at that time. These two visions 
bolstered up my spirit, all the more when I found him to be just as I had seen him in the 
visions, once at Warsaw during my third probation, and a second time at Cracow. 0 J esus, I

thank you for this great gift! And now when I hear people sometimes say that they have no 
confessor; that is to say, a director, fear takes hold of me, because I know very well how 
much harm I myself experienced when I did not have this help. It is so easy to go astray 
when one has no guide! 

62 0 life so dull and monotonous, how many treasures you contain! When I look at everything 
with the eyes of faith, no two hours are alike, and the dullness and monotony disappear. The 
grace which is given me in this hour will not be repeated in the next. It may be given me 
again, but it will not be the same grace. Time goes on, never to return again. Whatever is 
enclosed in it will never change; it seals with a seal for eternity. 

63 +Father Sopocko must be well loved by God. I say this because I myself have experienced 
how much God defends him at certain moments. When I see this, I rejoice greatly that God 
has such chosen ones. 


1929. The Trip to Calvary. [33i 


64 When I came to Vilnius for two months to replace a sister who had gone for her third 
probation [Sister Peter, who worked in the kitchen], I stayed a little longer than two months. 
One day, the Mother Superior f I rener 34i 1 . wanting to give me a bit of pleasure, gave me 
permission to go, together with another sister , lisi to Calvary to "walk the paths," as they 
say. I was delighted. Although it was not very far, it was Mother Superior's wish that we 
should go by boat. That evening Jesus said to me, I want you to stay home. I answered, 
"Jesus, everything is ready for us to leave tomorrow morning; what am I to do now?" The 
Lord answered, This trip will be harmful to your soul. I replied to Jesus, "You can find a 
way out. Arrange things in such a way that Your will may be done." At that moment the bell 
announced the time for sleep. I gave J esus a parting glance and went to my cell. 

Next morning the weather was beautiful, and my companion was filled with joy at the 
prospect of the great pleasure we would have in getting to see everything. But as for me, I 
was sure we would not go, even though there were no obstacles so far. 

We were to receive Holy Communion earlier and leave right after the thanksgiving. But 
during the time of Communion, all of a sudden, the weather changed. Clouds covered the 
sky, and the rain came down in torrents. Everyone was astounded at such a sudden change 
in the weather. 

Mother Superior said to me, "I am so sorry you cannot go, Sisters!" I answered, "Dear 
Mother, it doesn't really matter that we cannot go; it was God's will that we stay home." 
However, no one knew that it was Jesus' express desire that I stay home. I spent the whole 
day in recollection and meditation, thanking the Lord for having kept me home. That day, 

God granted me many heavenly consolations. 

65 One time during the novitiate, when Mother Directress sent me to work in the wards' kitchen, 
I was very upset because I could not manage the pots, which were very large. The most 
difficult task for me was draining the potatoes, and sometimes I spilt half of them with the 
water. When I told this to Mother Directress, she said that with time I would get used to it 
and gain the necessary skill. Yet the task was not getting any easier, as I was growing 
weaker every day. So I would move away when it was time to drain the potatoes. The sisters 
noticed that I avoided this task and were very much surprised. They did not know that I 
could not help in spite of all my willingness to do this and not spare myself. At noon, during 
the examination of conscience, I complained to God about my weakness. Then I heard the 
following words in my soul, From today on you will do this easily; I shall strengthen 
you. 

That evening, when the time came to drain off the water from the potatoes, I hurried to be 
the first to do it, trusting in the Lord's words. I took up the pot with ease and poured off the 
water perfectly. But when I took off the cover to let the potatoes steam off, I saw there in 
the pot, in the place of the potatoes, whole bunches of red roses, beautiful beyond 
description. I had never seen such roses before. Greatly astonished and unable to 
understand the meaning of this, I heard a voice within me saying, I change such hard 
work of yours into bouquets of most beautiful flowers, and their perfume rises up 
to My throne. From then on I have tried to drain the potatoes myself, not only during my

week when it was my turn to cook, but also in replacement of other sisters when it was their 
turn. And not only do I do this, but I try to be the first to help in any other burdensome task, 
because I have experienced how much this pleases God. 


66 O inexhaustible treasure of purity of intention which makes all our actions perfect and so 
pleasing to God! 

0 Jesus, You know how weak I am; be then ever with me; guide my actions and my whole 
being, You who are my very best Teacher! Truly, Jesus, I become frightened when I look at 
my own misery, but at the same time I am reassured by Your unfathomable mercy, which 
exceeds my misery by the measure of all eternity. This disposition of soul clothes me in Your 
power. O joy that flows from the knowledge of one's self! 0 unchanging Truth, Your 
constancy is everlasting! 

67 When I fell sick [probably the beginning of consumption] after my first vows and when, 
despite the kind and solicitous care of my Superiors and the efforts of the doctor, I felt 
neither better nor worse, remarks began to reach my ears which inferred that I was making 
believe. With that, my suffering was doubled, and this lasted for quite a long time. One day I 
complained to Jesus that I was being a burden to the sisters. Jesus answered me, You are 
not living for yourself but for souls, and other souls will profit from your sufferings. 
Your prolonged suffering will give them the light and strength to accept My will. 

68 The heaviest suffering for me was that it seemed to me that neither my prayers nor my good 
works were pleasing to God. I did not dare lift up my eyes to heaven. This caused me such 
great suffering during the community exercises in the chapel that one day Mother Superior 
[Raphael] called me aside after the exercises and said to me, "Sister, ask God for grace and 
consolation, because I can see for myself and the sisters keep telling me that the very sight 
of you evokes pity. I really do not know what to do with you, Sister. I command you to stop 
tormenting yourself for no reason." 

But all these conferences with Mother Superior brought me no relief, nor did they clarify 
anything for me. Rather, even greater darkness hid God from me. I looked for help in the 
confessional, but not even there did I find it. A saintly priest wanted to help me, but I was so 
miserable that I couldn't even define my trouble, and that vexed me even more. A deathly 
sadness penetrated my soul to such an extent that I was unable to hide it, and it was 
apparent to those around me. I lost hope. The night was growing darker and darker. The 
priest to whom I went to confession said to me, "I see very special graces in you, Sister, and 

1 am not worried about you at all; why are you torturing yourself in this way?" But at that 
time I did not understand at all what he was saying and was extremely surprised when, by 
way of penance, I was ordered to say the Te Deum or the Magnificat, or to run fast around 
the garden in the evening, or else to laugh out loud ten times a day. These penances were 
very surprising to me; but even with that the priest was not able to give me much help. 
Evidently, God wanted me to give Him glory through suffering. 

That priest consoled me, saying that in my present situation I was more pleasing to God than 
if I were filled with the greatest consolations. "It is a very great grace, Sister, "he told me, 
"that in your present condition, with all the torments of soul you are experiencing, you not 
only do not offend God, but you even try to practice virtues. I am looking into your soul, and 
I see God's great plans and special graces there; and seeing this, I give thanks to the Lord." 
But despite all that, my soul was in a state of torture; and in the midst of unspeakable 
torments, I imitated the blind man who entrusts himself to his guide, holding his hand firmly, 
not giving up obedience for a single moment, and this was my only safety in this fiery trial. 



69 +0 Jesus, eternal Truth, strengthen my feeble forces; You can do all things, Lord. I know 
that without You all my efforts are in vain. 0 Jesus, do not hide from me, for I cannot live 
without You. Listen to the cry of my soul. Your mercy has not been exhausted, Lord, so have 
pity on my misery. Your mercy surpasses the understanding of all Angels and people put 
together; and so, although it seems to me that You do not hear me, I put my trust in the

ocean of Your mercy, and I know that my hope will not be deceived. 

70 Only J esus knows how burdensome and difficult it is to accomplish one's duties when the soul 
is so interiorly tortured, the physical powers so weakened and the mind darkened. In the 
silence of my heart I kept saying to myself, "0 Christ, may delights, honor and glory be 
Yours, and suffering be mine. I will not lag one step behind as I follow You, though thorns 
wound my feet." 

71 I was sent for treatment to our house in Plock, and there I had the privilege of decorating the 
chapel with flowers. That was at Biala. [ML Sister Thecla did not always have time for this, so I 
often decorated the chapel by myself. One day, I had picked the prettiest roses to decorate 
the room of a certain person. When I was approaching the porch, I saw Jesus standing there. 
In a kindly way He asked me, My daughter, to whom are you taking these flowers? My 
silence was my reply to the Lord, because I recognized immediately that I had a very subtle 
attachment to this person, [37i which I had not noticed before. Suddenly J esus disappeared. 

At the same moment I threw the flowers on the ground and went before the Blessed 
Sacrament, my heart filled with gratitude for the grace of knowing myself. 

O Divine Sun, in Your rays the soul sees the tiniest specks of dust which displease You. 

72 0 Jesus, eternal Truth, our Life, I call upon You and I beg Your mercy for poor sinners. 0 
sweetest Heart of my Lord, full of pity and unfathomable mercy, I plead with You for poor 
sinners. 0 Most Sacred Heart, Fount of Mercy from which gush forth rays of inconceivable 
graces upon the entire human race, I beg of You light for poor sinners. 0 Jesus, be mindful of 
Your own bitter Passion and do not permit the loss of souls redeemed at so dear a price of 
Your most precious Blood. 0 J esus, when I consider the great price of Your Blood, I rejoice at 
its immensity, for one drop alone would have been enough for the salvation of all sinners. 
Although sin is an abyss of wickedness and ingratitude, the price paid for us can never be 
equalled. Therefore, let every soul trust in the Passion of the Lord, and place its hope in His 
mercy. God will not deny His mercy to anyone. Heaven and earth may change, but God's 
mercy will never be exhausted. Oh, what immense joy burns in my heart when I contemplate 
Your incomprehensible goodness, 0 J esus! I desire to bring all sinners to Your feet that they 
may glorify Your mercy throughout endless ages. 

73 0 my Jesus, despite the deep night that is all around me and the dark clouds which hide the 
horizon, I know that the sun never goes out. O Lord, though I cannot comprehend You and 
do not understand Your ways, I nonetheless trust in Your mercy. If it is Your will, Lord, that I 
live always in such darkness, may You be blessed. I ask You only one thing, Jesus: do not 
allow me to offend You in any way. 0 my J esus, You alone know the longings and the 
sufferings of my heart. I am glad I can suffer for You, however little. When I feel that the 
suffering is more than I can bear, I take refuge in the Lord in the Blessed Sacrament, and I 
speak to Him with profound silence. 


The Confession of One of Our Wards. 


74 One day I felt driven to take steps to see to it that the Feast of Mercy be instituted and the 
image of the Merciful J esus be painted, and I could find no peace. Something was pervading 
my whole being, and yet I feared being deluded. However, these doubts always came from 
outside, because in the depths of my soul I felt it was the Lord who was penetrating my 
being. The priest to whom I was going to confession at that time told me that one can often 
have illusions, and I felt that he was somewhat afraid to hear my confession. This was a 
torture for me. Seeing that I was getting very little help from people, I turned all the more to 
J esus, the best of all teachers. At one time, when I was filled with doubts as to whether the 
voice I heard came from the Lord or not, I began to speak to Jesus interiorly without forming 
any words. Suddenly an inner force took hold of me and I said, "If You who commune with 
me and talk to me are truly my God, I beg You, O Lord, to make this ward go this very day 
to confession; this sign will give me reassurance." At that very moment, the girl asked to go 
to confession. 

The Mother in charge of the class was surprised at this sudden change in her, but she

undertook to call a priest immediately, and this person made her confession with great 
compunction. At the same time, I heard a voice within me say, Do you believe Me now? 
And once again a strange power pervaded my soul, strengthening and reassuring me to such 
a degree that I myself was surprised that I had allowed myself to doubt even for a moment. 

75 But these doubts always come from without, a fact which inclined me to close myself up 
more and more within myself. When, during confession, I sense uncertainty on the part of 
the priest, I do not open my soul to its depths, but only accuse myself of my sins. A priest 
who is not at peace with himself will not be able to inspire peace in another soul. 

0 priests, you bright candles enlightening human souls, let your brightness never be 
dimmed. I understood that at that time it was not God's will that I uncover my soul 
completely. Later on, God did give me this grace. 

76 O my Jesus, direct my mind, take possession of my whole being, enclose me in the depths of 
Your heart, and protect me against the assaults of the enemy. My only hope is in You. Speak 
through my mouth when I, wretchedness itself, find myself with the mighty and wise, so that 
they will know that this undertaking is Yours and comes from You. 

Darkness and Temptations 

77 My mind became dimmed in a strange way; no truth seemed clear to me. When people 
spoke to me about God, my heart was like a rock. I could not draw from it a single sentiment 
of love for Him. When I tried, by an act of the will, to remain close to Him, I experienced 
great torments, and it seemed to me that I was only provoking God to an even greater 
anger. It was absolutely impossible for me to meditate as I had been accustomed to do in 
the past. I felt in my soul a great void, and there was nothing with which I could fill it. I 
began to suffer from a great hunger and yearning for God, but I saw my utter powerlessness. 

1 tried to read slowly, sentence by sentence, and to meditate in this way, but this also was of 
no avail. I understood nothing of what I had read. 

The abyss of my misery was constantly before my eyes. Every time I entered the chapel for 
some spiritual exercise, I experienced even worse torments and temptations. More than 
once, all through Holy Mass, I had to struggle against blasphemous thoughts which were 
forcing themselves to my lips. I felt an aversion for the Holy Sacraments, and it seemed to 
me that I was not profiting from them in any way. It was only out of obedience to my 
confessor that I frequented them, and this blind obedience was for me the only path I could 



follow and my very last hope of survival. The priest explained to me that these were trials 
sent by God and that, in the situation I was in, not only was I not offending God, but I was 
most pleasing to Him. "This is a sign," he told me, "that God loves you very much and that 
He has great confidence in you, since He is sending you such trials." But these words brought 
me no comfort; it seemed to me that they did not apply to me at all. 

One thing did surprise me: it often happened that, at the time when I was suffering greatly, 
these terrible torments would disappear suddenly just as I was approaching the confessional; 
but as soon as I had left the confessional, all these torments would again seize me with even 
greater ferocity. I would then fall on my face before the Blessed Sacrament repeating these 
words: "Even if You kill me, still will I trust in You!" [cf. J ob 13: 15] It seemed to me that I 
would die in these agonies. But the most terrible thought for me was the conviction that I 
had been rejected by God. Then other thoughts came to me: why strive to acquire virtues 
and do good works? why mortify and annihilate yourself? what good is it to take vows? to 
pray? to sacrifice and immolate yourself? why sacrifice myself all the time? what good is it - 
if I am already rejected by God? why all these efforts? And here, God alone knew what was 
going on in my heart. 

78 Once when I was being crushed by these dreadful sufferings, I went into the chapel and said 
from the bottom of my soul, "Do what You will with me, O Jesus; I will adore You in 
everything. May Your will be done in me, O my Lord and my God, and I will praise Your 
infinite mercy." Through this act of submission, these terrible torments left me. Suddenly I 
saw Jesus, who said to me, I am always in your heart. An inconceivable joy entered my

soul, and a great love of God set my heart aflame. I see that God never tries us beyond what 
we are able to suffer. Oh, I fear nothing; if God sends such great suffering to a soul, He 
upholds it with an even greater grace, although we are not aware of it. One act of trust at 
such moments gives greater glory to God than whole hours passed in prayer filled with 
consolations. Now I see that if God wants to keep a soul in darkness, no book, no confessor 
can bring it light. 

79 O Mary, my Mother and my Lady, I offer You my soul, my body, my life and my death, and 
all that will Follow it. I place everything in Your hands. O my Mother, cover my soul with Your 
virginal mantle and grant me the grace of purity of heart, soul and body. Defend me with 
Your power against all enemies, and especially against those who hide their malice behind 
the mask of virtue. O lovely lily! You are for me a mirror, 0 my Mother! 

80 O Jesus, Divine Prisoner of Love, when I consider Your love and how You emptied Yourself for 
me, my senses fail me. You hide Your inconceivable majesty and lower Yourself to miserable 
me. O King of Glory, though You hide Your beauty, yet the eye of my soul rends the veil. I 
see the angelic choirs giving You honor without cease, and all the heavenly Powers praising 
You without cease, and without cease they are saying: Holy, Holy, Holy. 

Oh, who will comprehend Your love and Your unfathomable mercy toward us! O Prisoner of 
Love, I lock up my poor heart in this tabernacle, that it may adore You without cease night 
and day. I know of no obstacle in this adoration, and even though I be physically distant, my 
heart is always with You. Nothing can put a stop to my love for You. No obstacles exist for 
me. O my J esus, I will console You for all the ingratitude, the blasphemies, the coldness, the 
hatred of the wicked, the sacrileges. 0 J esus, I want to burn as 'a pure offering and to be 
consumed before the throne of Your hiddenness. I plead with You unceasingly for poor dying 
sinners. 



81 0 Holy Trinity, One and Indivisible God, may You be blessed for this great gift and testament 
of mercy. My Jesus, to atone for blasphemers I will keep silent when unjustly reprimanded 
and in this way make partial amends to You. I am singing within my soul an unending hymn 
to You, and no one will suspect or understand this. The song of my soul is known to You 
alone, O my Creator and Lord! 

82 I will not allow myself to be so absorbed in the whirlwind of work as to forget about God. I 
will spend all my free moments at the feet of the Master hidden in the Blessed Sacrament. 

He has been tutoring me from my most tender years. 

83 Write this: before I come as the just J udge, I am coming first as the King of Mercy. 
Before the day of justice arrives, there will be given to people a sign in the heavens 
of this sort: All light in the heavens will be extinguished, and there will be great 
darkness over the whole earth. Then the sign of the cross will be seen in the sky, 
and from the openings where the hands and the feet of the Savior were nailed will 
come forth great lights which will light up the earth for a period of time. This will 
take place shortly before the last day. 

84 O Blood and Water, which gushed forth from the Heart of Jesus as a fount of mercy for us, I 
trust in You! 

Vilnius, August 2, 1934. 

85 On Friday, after Holy Communion, I was carried in spirit before the throne of God. There I 
saw the heavenly Powers which incessantly praise God. Beyond the throne I saw a brightness 
inaccessible to creatures, and there only the Incarnate Word enters as Mediator. When Jesus 
entered this light, I heard these words, Write down at once what you hear: I am the 
Lord in My essence and am immune to orders or needs. If I call creatures into being 
- that is the abyss of My mercy. And at that very moment I found myself, as before, in 
our chapel at my kneeler, just as Mass had ended. I