 in You. 

Divine Mercy, embracing all the works of His hands, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, crown of all of God's handiwork, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, in which we are all immersed, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, sweet relief for anguished hearts, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, only hope of despairing souls, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, repose of hearts, peace amidst fear, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, delight and ecstasy of holy souls, I trust in You.

Divine Mercy, inspiring hope against all hope, I trust in You. 

950 + Eternal God, in whom mercy is endless and the treasury of compassion inexhaustible, look 
kindly upon us and increase Your mercy in us, that in difficult moments we might not despair 
nor become despondent, but with great confidence submit ourselves to Your holy will, which 
is Love and Mercy itself. 



Notebook I: 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 


301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-521 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801 -850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1 001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1 .51-1200 t 1 201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231- 1 321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401- 1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804- 1 828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 2 


951 + 0 incomprehensible and limitless Mercy Divine, To extol and adore You worthily, who 
can? Supreme attribute of Almighty God, You are the sweet hope for sinful man. 

Into one hymn yourselves unite, stars, earth and sea, and in one accord, thankfully and 
fervently sing of the incomprehensible Divine Mercy. 

952 My J esus, You see that Your holy will is everything to me. 1 1 makes no difference to me 
what You do with me. You command me to set to work-and I begin calmly, although I know 
that I am incapable of it; through Your representatives, You order me to waitso I wait 
patiently; You fill my soul with enthusiasmbut You do not make it possible for me to act; 

You attract me to yourself in heaven-and You leave me in this world; You pour into my soul 
a great yearning for yourself-and You hide yourself from me. I am dying of the desire to be 
united with You forever, and You do not let death come near me. O will of God, you are the 
nourishment and delight of my soul. When I submit to the holy will of my God, a deep 
peace floods my soul. 

0 my J esus, You do not give a reward for the successful performance of a work, but for the 
good will and the labor undertaken. Therefore, I am completely at peace, even if all my 
undertakings and efforts should be thwarted or should come to naught. If I do all that is in 
my power, the rest is not my business. And therefore the greatest storms do not disturb the 
depths of my peace; the will of God dwells in my conscience. 

953 + February 15, 1937. Today my suffering increased somewhat: I not only feel greater pain 
all through my lungs, but also some strange pains in my intestines. I am suffering as much 
as my weak nature can bear, all for immortal souls, to plead the mercy of God for poor 
sinners and to beg for strength for priests. Oh, how much reverence I have for priests; and 

1 am asking Jesus, the High Priest, to grant them many graces. 

954 Today after Holy Communion, the Lord told me, My daughter, My delight is to unite 
myself with you. 1 1 is when you submit yourself to My will that you give Me the 
greatest glory and draw down upon yourself a sea of blessings. I would not take 
such special delight in you if you were not living by my will. O my sweet Guest, I am 
prepared for all sacrifices for Your sake, but You know that I am weakness itself. 
Nevertheless, with You I can do all things. O my Jesus, I beseech You, be with me at each 
instant. 

955 February 15, 1937. Today, I heard these words in my soul: Host pleasing to My Father, 
know. My daughter, that the entire Holy Trinity finds Its special delight in you, 
because you live exclusively by the will of God. No sacrifice can compare with this. 



956 + After these words, the knowledge of God's will came to me; that is to say, I now see 
everything from a higher point of view and accept all events and things, pleasant and 
unpleasant, with love, as tokens of the heavenly Father's special affection. 

957 The pure offering of my will will burn on the altar of love. That my sacrifice may be perfect, 

I unite myself closely with the sacrifice of Jesus on the cross. When great sufferings will 
cause my nature to tremble, and my physical and spiritual strength will diminish, then will I

hide myself deep in the open wound of the Heart of Jesus, silent as a dove, without 
complaint. Let all my desires, even the holiest, noblest and most beautiful, take always the 
last place and Your holy will, the very first. The least of Your desires, 0 Lord, is more 
precious to me than heaven, with all its treasures. I know very well that people will not 
understand me; that is why my sacrifice will be purer in Your eyes. 

958 Some days ago, a certain person came to me and asked me to pray for her intention, as 
she had some urgent and important business. All of a sudden, I felt in my soul that this 
matter was not pleasing to God, and I replied that I would not pray for this intention, "but I 
will pray for you, in general" [I added]. A few days later, this lady came back to me and 
thanked me for not having prayed for her intention, but rather for her, because she had 
been motivated by a spirit of revenge toward a certain person to whom she owed respect 
and veneration in virtue of the fourth commandment. The Lord J esus had changed her 
interior [dispositions], and she herself acknowledged her guilt; but was, however, surprised 
that I had penetrated her secret. 

959 + Today I received a letter from Father Sopocko, who sent me greetings for my feast day 
[February 15]. His greetings gave me joy, but his poor health made me sad. I had known 
about this by interior intuition, but had not quite believed it. But it seems to me that if he 
himself wrote that this was so, then the other things about which he did not write are also 
true, and my interior knowledge has not deceived me. He requested me to underline all that 
I know does not come from me; that is to say, all that Jesus tells me which I hear in my 
soul. fi 72 i He has already asked me to do this several times, but I did not have the time 
and, to tell the truth, I was in no hurry to do so. But how does he know that I have not 
done this? I was very surprised; but now I am setting about this work with all my heart. 0 
my Jesus, Your representative's will is clearly Your holy will, without a shadow of a doubt. 

960 February 16, 1937. Today I entered a neighboring room by mistake and so, for a while, I 
talked with the person who was there. When I returned to my own room, I thought about 
that person for a few moments. Then suddenly, Jesus stood by my side and said, My 

daughter, what are you thinking about right now? Without thinking, I snuggled close 
to His heart, because I realized that I had been thinking too much about creatures. 


961 + This morning after completing my spiritual exercises, I began at once to crochet. I sensed 
a stillness in my heart; I sensed that Jesus was resting in it. That deep and sweet 
consciousness of God's presence prompted me to say to the Lord, "0 Most Holy Trinity 
dwelling in my heart, I beg You: grant the grace of conversion to as many souls as the 
[number of] stitches that I will make today with this crochet hook." Then I heard these 
words in my soul: My daughter, too great are your demands. "Jesus, You know that for 
You it is easier to grant much rather than a little." That is so, it is less difficult for Me to 
grant a soul much rather than a little, but every conversion of a sinful soul 
demands sacrifice. "Well, Jesus, I offer You this whole-hearted work of mine; this offering 
does not seem to me to be too small for such a large number of souls; You know, Jesus, 
that for thirty years You were saving souls by just this kind of work. And since holy 
obedience forbids me to perform great penances and mortifications, therefore I ask You, 
Lord: accept these mere nothings stamped with the seal of obedience as great things." Then 
I heard a voice in my soul: My dear daughter, I comply with your request. 

962 + I often see a certain person dear to God. The Lord has great love for him, not only 
because he is striving to spread the veneration of God's mercy, but also because of the love 
he has for the Lord God, although he does not always feel this love in his own heart and is 
almost always in Gethsemane. However, this person is always pleasing to God, and his 
great patience will overcome all difficulties. 

963 + Oh, if only the suffering soul knew how it is loved by God, it would die of joy and excess 
of happiness! Some day, we will know the value of suffering, but then we will no longer be 
able to suffer. The present moment is ours.

964 February 17, 1937. This morning during Holy Mass, I saw the Suffering Jesus, His Passion 
was imprinted on my body in an invisible manner, but no less painfully. 

965 Jesus looked at me and said, Souls perish in spite of My bitter Passion. I am giving 
them the last hope of salvation; that is, the Feast of My Mercy. If they will not 
adore My mercy, they will perish for all eternity. Secretary of My mercy, write, tell 
souls about this great mercy of Mine, because the awful day, the day of My justice, 
is near. 

966 + Today, I heard in my soul these words: My daughter, it is time for you to take 
action; I am with you. Great persecutions and sufferings are in store for you, but 
be comforted by the thought that many souls will be saved and sanctified by this 
work. 

967 + When I set to work at underlining the Lord's words and thus was going through 
everything in sequence, I reached the page where I had marked down Father Andrasz's 
advice and directions. I did not know what to do, to underline or not to underline, and then 
I heard these words in my soul: Underline, because these words are Mine; I have 
borrowed the lips of the friend of My Heart in order to speak to you and reassure 
you. You are to observe these directions until your death. It would not please Me 
at all if you were to disobey these directions. Know that it is I who have placed 
him between Myself and your soul. I am doing this to set you at peace and so that 
you may not err. 



968 Since I have placed you in this priest's special care, you are thus exempted from 
giving a detailed account to your superiors concerning My relationship with you. 

I n all other matters, be as a child with your superiors, but whatever I do in the 
depths of your soul is to be told, with all frankness, only to the priests. 

And I have noticed that, from the time God gave me a spiritual director, He has not 
required me to report everything to the superiors, as was the case before, but only that 
which concerns external matters; apart from this, only the director knows my soul. To have 
a spiritual director is a special grace of God. Oh, how few have received it! The soul remains 
in constant peace amidst the greatest difficulties. Every day after Holy Communion, I thank 
the Lord J esus for this grace, and every day I ask the Holy Spirit to enlighten him. I have 
truly experienced in my soul what power the director's words have. Blessed be God's mercy 
for this grace! 

969 +Today, I went to meditate before the Blessed Sacrament [in the sanatorium chapel]. 

When I approached the altar, God's presence pervaded my soul, I was plunged into the 
ocean of His divinity, and Jesus said to me, My daughter, all that exists is yours. I 
answered the Lord, "My heart wants nothing but You alone, 0 Treasure of my heart. For all 
the gifts You give me, thank you, 0 Lord, but I desire only Your Heart. Though the heavens 
are immense, they are nothing to me without You. You know very well, 0 J esus, that I am 
constantly swooning because of my longing for You." Know this. My daughter, that you 
are already tasting now what other souls will obtain only in eternity. 

970 And all of a sudden, my soul was flooded with the light of the knowledge of God. Oh, would 
that I could express even a little of what my soul experiences when resting near the Heart 
of the incomprehensible Majesty! I cannot put it into words. Only a soul who has 
experienced such a grace at least once in his life, will recognize it. When I returned to my 
room, it seemed to me that I was coming from real life to death. When the doctor came to 
take my pulse, he was surprised: "Sister, what happened? You have never had a pulse like 
this! I would like to know what has speeded it up so much." What could I tell him, when I 
myself did not know that my pulse was so rapid. I only know that I am dying of yearning for 
God, but this I did not tell him, for how can medicine help in this instance? 

971 February 19, 1937. Contact with the dying. They ask me for prayer, and I can pray, as the 
Lord grants me an extraordinary spirit of prayer. I am constantly united with Him, and I am 
fully aware that I live for souls in order to bring them to Your mercy, 0 Lord. In this matter, 
no sacrifice is too insignificant. 

972 Today, the doctor decided that I am to stay here until April. It is God's will, even though I 
did want to be back in the company of my sisters.

973 I learned today about the death of one of our sisters 11731 who died in Plock, but she visited 
me even before they told me about her death. 

974 February 22, 1937. Today, there began in our chapel a retreat for the hospital attendants, 
although anyone who wishes may take part in it. There is one conference a day. Father 
Bonaventure ri74i speaks for a whole hour, and he speaks directly to souls. I took part in 
this retreat, as I very much desire to know God more deeply and to love Him more 
ardently, for I have understood that the greater the knowledge, the stronger the love. 


975 Today I heard these words: Pray for souls that they be not afraid to approach the 
tribunal of My mercy. Do not grow weary of praying for sinners. You know what a 
burden their souls are to My Heart. Relieve My deathly sorrow; dispense My mercy. 

976 February 24, 1937. Today during Holy Mass, I saw the dying J esus. The sufferings of the 
Lord pierced my soul and body in an invisible manner. The pain is enormous, though it lasts 
a very short time. 

977 During the singing of the Lenten Lamentations, I am so taken up with His Passion that I 
cannot withhold my tears. I would like to hide somewhere in order to give myself freely to 
the sorrow which flows from the consideration of His Passion. 

978 When I was praying for the intention of Father Andrasz, I learned how very pleasing he is to 
God. Since then, I have had even greater respect for him, as for a saint. This has given me 
great joy, and I thank God fervently for it. 

979 Today at Benediction, I saw Jesus, and He spoke these words to me: Be obedient to your 
director in everything; his word is My will. Be certain in the depths of your soul 
that it is I who am speaking through his lips, and I desire that you reveal the state 
of your soul to him with the same simplicity and candor as you have with Me. I say 
it again. My daughter: know that his word is My will for you. 

980 Today, I saw the Lord in great beauty, and He said to me, My loving host, pray for 
priests, especially during this time of harvest. My Heart is pleased with you, and 
for your sake I am blessing the earth. 

981 I understood that these two years of interior suffering which I have undergone in 
submission to God's will in order to know it better have advanced me further in perfection 
than the previous ten years. For two years now, I have been on the cross between heaven 
and earth. That is to say, I am bound by the vow of obedience and must obey the superior 
as God himself. And on the other hand, God makes His will known to me directly, and so my 
inner torture is so great that no one will either understand or imagine these spiritual 
sufferings. It seems to me that it would be easier to give up my life than to go again and 
again through one hour of such pain. I am not even going to write much about this matter, 
because one cannot describe what it is like to know God's will directly and at the same time 
to be perfectly obedient to the divine will as expressed indirectly through the superiors. 
Thanks be to God that He has given me a director; otherwise, I would not have advanced 
one single step. 

982 + I recently received a lovely letter from my dear seventeen-year-old sister [Wanda r 1751 1 . 
She is begging and entreating me to help her enter the convent. She is ready for any 
sacrifices for God. I can tell from her letter that the Lord himself is guiding her, and I rejoice 
in God's great mercy. 

983 + Today, the Majesty of God enveloped and transpierced my soul to its very depths. The 
greatness of God is pervading my being and flooding me so that I am completely drowning 
in His greatness. I am dissolving and disappearing entirely in Him as in my life-source, as in 
perfect life. 


984 My Jesus, I understand well that my perfection consists not in the fact that You command 
me to carry out these great works of Yours-Oh no!-the soul's greatness does not consist in 
this, but in great love for You. 0 J esus, in the depths of my soul I understand that the 
greatest achievements cannot compare with one act of pure love for You. I desire to be 
faithful to You and to do Your bidding. I am making use of my strength and my reason to 
carry out all You are asking of me, 0 Lord, but I have not the least shadow of attachment to 
all this. I do it all because such is Your will. All my love is drowned, not in Your works, but in 
You yourself, 0 my Creator and Lord!

985 February 25, 1937. I prayed earnestly for a happy death on behalf of a certain soul who 
was suffering much. For two weeks, she had remained between life and death. I was 
touched with pity for her and said to the Lord, "Sweet J esus, if the works I am undertaking 
for Your glory are pleasing to You, then please take her to Yourself and let her rest in Your 
mercy." I was strangely reassured; and, after a short while, they came to tell me that the 
person who had been suffering so much had just died. 

986 I saw a certain priest [probably Father Sopocko] in need and prayed for him until Jesus 
looked upon him with kindness and granted him His strength. 

987 Today, I came to know that a member of my family is offending God and is in great peril of 
death. This knowledge pierced my soul with such great pain that I thought I would not 
survive that offense against God. I begged God's pardon, but I saw His great anger. 

988 I was praying for a certain priest [probably Father Sopocko], asking God to help him in 
certain matters when I suddenly saw Jesus Crucified. His eyes were closed, and He was 
immersed in torture. I worshiped His five wounds, each one separately, and asked His 
blessing for him. Jesus gave me to know interiorly how dear that soul was to Him, and I felt 
that grace was flowing from J esus' wounds upon that soul who, like J esus, is also stretched 
upon the cross. 

989 My Lord and my God, You know that it is You alone whom my soul has come to love. My 
soul is entirely drowned in You, 0 Lord. Even if I did not accomplish any of the things that 
You have made known to me, 0 Lord, I would be completely at peace because I would have 
done what I could. 

990 I know well, 0 Lord, that You have no need of our works; You demand love. Love, love and 
once again, love of God-there is nothing greater in heaven or on earth. The greatest 
greatness is to love God; true greatness is in loving God; real wisdom is to love God. All 
that is great and beautiful is in God; there is no beauty or greatness outside of Him. 0 you 
sages of the world and you great minds, recognize that true greatness is in loving God! Oh, 
how astonished I am that some people deceive themselves, saying: There is no eternity! 

991 February 26, 1937. Today, I saw how the Holy Mysteries were being celebrated without 
liturgical vestments and in private homes, because of a passing storm; and I saw the sun 
come out from the Blessed Sacrament, and all other lights went out, or rather, they were 
dimmed; and all the people were looking toward this [one] light. But at the present time I 
do not understand the meaning of this vision. ri76i 


992 + I am going forward through life amidst rainbows and storms, but with my head held high 
with pride, for I am a royal child. I feel that the blood of Jesus is circulating in my veins, 
and I have put my trust in the great mercy of the Lord. 

993 + I asked the Lord to have a certain person come to visit me today so that I could see her 
one more time, and that would be a sign for me that she was being called to the convent 
which Jesus is having me establish. And, O wonder, the person in question came, and I 
tried to form her a bit, spiritually. I began to show her the way of self-denial and sacrifice, 
which she readily accepted. However, I have placed this whole matter in the hands of the 
Lord, that He may direct everything according to His good pleasure. 

994 Today, when I heard the hymn, "Good night, Holy Head of My J esus," on the radio, my 
spirit was suddenly drowned in God, and divine love flooded my soul; I dwelt for a moment 
with the heavenly Father. 

995 + Although it is not easy to live in constant agony, 

To be nailed to the cross of various pains, 

Still, I am inflamed with love by loving, 

And like a Seraph I love God, though I am but weakness. 

Oh, great is the soul that, midst suffering, 

Stands faithfully by God and does His will 

And remains uncomforted midst great rainbows and storms, 

For God's pure love sweetens her fate. 

It is no great thing to love God in prosperity 
And thank Him when all goes well, 

But rather to adore Him midst great adversities 

And love Him for His own sake and place one's hope in Him. 

When the soul is in the shadows of Gethsemane, 

All alone in the bitterness of pain, 

It ascends toward the heights of Jesus, 

And though ever drinking bitterness- it is not sad. 

When the soul does the will of the Most High God,

Even amidst constant pain and torments, 

Having pressed its lips to the chalice proferred, 

It becomes mighty, and nothing will daunt it. 

Though tortured, it repeats: Your will be done, 

Patiently awaiting the moment of its transfiguration, 

For, though in deepest darkness, it hears the voice of Jesus: You are Mine, 

And this it will know fully when the veil falls. 

996 February 28, 1937. Today, I was undergoing the Passion of J esus for a longer time, and 
thus I saw that many souls were in need of prayer. I feel that I am being completely 
transformed into prayer in order to beg God's mercy for every soul. O my Jesus, I am 
receiving You into my heart as a pledge of mercy for souls. 



997 This evening, when I heard the hymn, "Good night, Holy Head of my Jesus," on the radio, 
my spirit was suddenly swept away to God's mysterious bosom, and I knew in what the 
greatness of a soul consists and what matters to God: love, love, and once again, love. And 
1 understood how all that exists is saturated with God, and such a love of God inundated 
my soul that I am at a loss to describe it. Happy the soul that knows how to love 
unreservedly, for in this lies its greatness. 

998 Today, I took part in a one-day retreat. When I was at the last conference, rmi the priest 
was speaking of how much the world needs God's mercy, and that this seems to be a 
special time when people have great need of prayer and God's mercy. Then I heard a voice 
in my soul: These words are for you. Do all you possibly can for this work of My 
mercy. I desire that My mercy be worshiped, and I am giving mankind the last 
hope of salvation; that is, recourse to My mercy. My Heart rejoices in this feast. 
After these words, I understood that nothing can dispense me from the obligation which the 
Lord demands from me. 

999 Last night I was in such pain that I thought it was the end. The doctors could not diagnose 
what the sickness was. I felt as if my entrails had been torn to shreds, but after a few hours 
of such sufferings I am all right. All this is for sinners. Let Your mercy descend upon them, 

O Lord. 

1000 In the terrible desert of life, 

0 my sweetest J esus, 

Protect souls from disaster, 

For You are the Fountain of Mercy. 

Let the resplendence of Your rays, 

0 sweet Commander of our souls, 

Let mercy change the world. 

And you who have received this grace, serve Jesus. 

Steep is the great highway I must travel, 

But I fear nothing, 

For the pure fount of mercy is flowing for my sake, 

And, with it, strength for the humble soul. 

1 am exhausted and worn out, 

But my conscience bears me witness 

That I do all for the greater glory of the Lord, 

The Lord who is my repose and my heritage. 

[End of Notebook Two of the Diary.] 


Notebook I: 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 


301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-521 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1001-1050 t 1051-1 100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231- 132 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401-1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 3 


1001 + J.M.J. 

Thank You, 0 Lord, my Master, 

That You have transformed me entirely into Yourself, 

And accompany me through life's toils and labors; 

I fear nothing when I have You in my heart. 

+ J. M. J. 

1002 The Lord's Supper is laid, 

Jesus sits down at table with His Apostles, 

His Being all transformed into love, 

For such was the Holy Trinity's counsel. 

With great desire, I desire to eat with you, 

Before I suffer death. 

About to leave you, love holds Me in your midst. 

He sheds His Blood, gives His life, for He loves immensely. 

Love hides beneath the appearance of bread, 

Departing, He remains with us. 

Such self-abasement was not needed, 

Yet burning love hid Him under these species. 

Over the bread and wine He says these words: 

"This is My Blood, this is My Body." 

Although mysterious, these are words of love. 

Then He passes the Cup among His disciples.

Jesus grew deeply troubled within 

And said, "One of you will betray his Master." 

They fell silent, with a silence as of the tomb, 

And John inclined his head on His breast. 

The supper is ended. 

Let us go to Gethsemane. 

Love is satisfied, And there the traitor is waiting. 


+ J.M.J. 



1003 0 Divine Will, You are my nourishment, You are my delight. Hasten, 0 Lord, the Feast of 
Mercy that souls may recognize the fountain of Your goodness. 

God and souls. 

Sister M. Faustina of the Blessed Sacrament. 

Cracow, March 1, 1937. 

1004 0 will of the Omnipotent God, 

You are my delight, 

You are my joy. 

Whatever the hand of my Lord holds out to me 
I will accept with gladness, submission and love. 

Your holy will is my repose; 

In it is contained all my sanctity, 

And all my eternal salvation, 

For doing God's will is the greatest glory. 

The will of God-those are His various wishes 
Which my soul carries out without reserve, 

Because such are His divine desires, 

In those moments when God shares His confidences with me. 

Do with me as You will, Lord. 

I place no obstacles, I make no reservations. 

For You are my whole delight and the love of my soul, 

And to You, in turn, I pour out the confidences of my heart. 

+ J.M.J. Cracow, March 1, 1937. 

+ Third Notebook God and Souls. 

1005 Let the glory and praise to The Divine Mercy rise from every creature throughout all ages 
and times. 

1006 + O my Lord and God, You command me to write about the graces You grant me. O my 
Jesus, were it not for a clear command from my confessors, [ 178] that I am to write down 
what goes on in my soul, I would not, of my own choice, write a single word. And so, if I do 
write about myself, it is at the formal command of holy obedience. 

1007 + Praise and glory be to You, O Holy Trinity, Eternal God. May the mercy springing from 
Your very bowels protect us from Your just anger. Let the praise of Your incomprehensible 
mercy resound everywhere. All Your works bear the seal of Your unfathomable mercy, O 
God. 

1008 March 1, 1937. The Lord gave me to know how displeased He is with a talkative soul. I find 
no rest in such a soul. The constant din tires Me, and in the midst of it the soul 
cannot discern My voice. 


1009 Today I asked the Lord J esus to let me meet with a certain person, and this would be a sign 
for me that He is calling her to this convent [which I am to found]. And I did meet her and 
understood that this soul has a vocation, and I asked the Lord to deign to form her Himself. 

I have talked to her often about a vocation; the Lord will do the rest. 

1010 + March 5, 1937. Today, I experienced the Passion of the Lord J esus in my own body for a 
long while. The pain is very great, but all this is for the sake of immortal souls. 

1011 Today, the Lord visited me, pressed me to His Heart and said, Rest, My little child. I am 
always with you. 

1012 + March 8, 1937. Today, as I was praying for the intention of Father Andrasz, I suddenly 
understood how intimately this soul communed with God and how pleasing he was to the 
Lord. It gave me immense joy, because I desire intensely that all souls be united with God 
as closely as possible. 

1013 + During prayer today, my soul was overcome with such a strong desire to begin the work, 
that I could not restrain my enthusiasm. Oh, how ardently I desire that the souls in this 
Congregation present themselves before the throne of God and continuously implore His 
incomprehensible mercy on behalf of the whole world, praising and glorifying this 
unfathomable mercy of God. A mysterious force is driving me to action. 

1014 March 12, 1937. I saw the weariness of a certain priest [probably Father Sopocko] for 
whom the Lord has traced out a hard and difficult road; but the fruits of his work are alive. 
May God give us many such souls, capable of loving Him in the midst of the greatest 
torments. 

1015 + I felt today how greatly a certain dying soul desired prayers. I prayed until I felt she had 
died. Oh, dying souls are in such great need of prayer! O Jesus, inspire souls to pray often 
for the dying. 

1016 March 15, 1937. Today, I entered into the bitterness of the Passion of the Lord Jesus. I 
suffered in a purely spiritual way. I learned how horrible sin was. God gave me to know the 
whole hideousness of sin. I learned in the depths of my soul how horrible sin was, even the

smallest sin, and how much it tormented the soul of Jesus. I would rather suffer a thousand 
hells than commit even the smallest venial sin. 

1017 The Lord said to me, I want to give myself to souls and to fill them with My love, but 
few there are who want to accept all the graces My love has intended for them. My 
grace is not lost; if the soul for whom it was intended does not accept it, another 
soul takes it. 

1018 I frequently feel that certain persons are praying for me. I experience this suddenly in my 
soul, but I do not always know which person is interceding for me. I also know when some 
person has trouble because of something that has to do with me; of this too I am inwardly 
aware, even though the distance [that separates us] is very great. [ 1791 


1019 March 18, 1937. I have come to know that I have received a certain grace that brings me 
into great intimacy and communion with the Lord. He gives me to know this by means of an 
interior light. He allows me to know His greatness and holiness and how graciously He 
lowers himself to me. He gives me an exclusive knowledge of His love for me, and of how 
He is Lord of absolutely all things, and also of how He gives himself to a soul while 
suspending all the laws of nature. He acts as He wills. 

1020 I understand the spiritual espousal of a soul with God, which has no exterior manifestation. 
It is a purely interior act between the soul and God. This grace has drawn me into the very 
burning center of God's love. I have come to understand His Trinitarian Quality and the 
absolute Oneness of His Being. This grace is different from all other graces. It is so 
extremely spiritual that my inaccurate description knows not how to express even a shade 
of it. 

1021 + I have such a strong desire to hide myself that I would like to live as though I did not 
exist. I feel a strange inner urge to hide myself as deeply as possible so as to be known 
only to the Heart of J esus. I want to be a quiet little dwelling place for J esus to rest in. I 
shall admit nothing that might awaken my Beloved. My concealment gives me a chance to 
commune constantly and exclusively with my Bridegroom. I commune with creatures in so 
far as it is pleasing to Him. My heart has come to love the Lord with the full force of love, 
and I know no other love, because it is from the beginning that my soul has sunk deeply in 
the Lord as in its only treasure. 

1022 + Although outwardly I meet with many sufferings and various adversities, this does not, 
however, lessen my interior life for a moment nor disturb my inner silence. I do not fear at 
all being abandoned by creatures because, even if all abandoned me, I would not be alone, 
for the Lord is with me. And even if the Lord were to hide, love will know how to find Him. 
For love knows no gates or guards; even the keen-eyed Cherub himself, with his flaming 
sword, will not stop love; it will work its way through wilderness and scorching heat, 
through storm, thunder and darkness, and will reach the source from which it came, and 
there it will endure forever. All things will come to an end; but love, never. 

1023 + Today, I received some oranges. When the sister had left, I thought to myself, "Should I 
eat the oranges instead of doing penance and mortifying myself during Holy Lent? After all, 

I am feeling a bit better." Then I heard a voice in my soul: My daughter, you please Me 
more by eating the oranges out of obedience and love of Me than by fasting and 
mortifying yourself of your own will. A soul that loves Me very much must, ought 
to live by My will. I know your heart, and I know that it will not be satisfied by 
anything but My love alone. 

1024 + I would not know how to live without the Lord. Jesus often visits me in this seclusion, 
teaches me, reassures me, rebukes me, and admonishes me. He himself forms my heart 
according to His divine wishes and likings, but always with much goodness and mercy. Our 
hearts are fused as one. 

1025 March 19, 1937. Today, I united myself inspirit with the Adoration that is taking place in our 
house [40-hour adoration in Cracow], but my soul was full of torments, and some strange 
kind of apprehension was piercing my heart. Because of this, I redoubled my prayers. 
Suddenly I saw the gaze of God reaching into the depths of my heart. 



1026 As I sat down to a very tasty breakfast, I said to the Lord, "Thank you for these gifts, but

my heart is dying of longing for You, and nothing earthly is tasty to me. I desire the food of 
Your love." 

1027 Today I was drawn by some mysterious force to act. I must resist this attraction, or else I 
would follow it at once. 

1028 March 21, 1937. Palm Sunday. During Mass, my soul was steeped in the bitterness and 
suffering of Jesus. Jesus gave me to understand how much He had suffered in that 
triumphal procession. "Hosanna" was reverberating in Jesus' heart as an echo of "Crucify." 
Jesus allowed me to feel this in a special way. 

1029 The doctor did not allow me to go to the chapel to attend the Passion Service, although I 
had a great desire for it; however, I prayed in my own room. Suddenly I heard the bell in 
the next room, and I went in and rendered a service to a seriously sick person. When I 
returned to my room, I suddenly saw the Lord Jesus, who said, My daughter, you gave 
Me greater pleasure by rendering Me that service than if you had prayed for a long 
time. I answered, "But it was not to You, Jesus, but to that patient that I rendered this 
service." And the Lord answered me, Yes, My daughter, but whatever you do for your 
neighbor, you do for Me. 

1030 + O my J esus, give me wisdom, give me a mind great and enlightened by Your light, and 
this only, that I may know You better, O Lord. For the better I get to know You, the more 
ardently will I love You, the sole object of my love. I n You my soul drowns, in You my heart 
dissolves. I know not how to love partially, but only with the full strength of my soul and 
the total ardor of my heart. You yourself, O Lord, have enkindled this love of mine for You; 
in You my heart has drowned forever. 

1031 March 22, 1937. As I was talking, today, to a certain person, I recognized that she was 
suffering greatly in spirit, although exteriorly she pretended that she was very happy and 
was not suffering at all. I felt inspired to tell her that what was troubling her was a 
temptation. When I disclosed to her what was torturing her, she burst into tears and told 
me that she had come to see me precisely to speak to me, because she felt that it would 
bring her relief. The suffering was of such a kind that the soul was being attracted by God's 
grace on the one hand and by the world on the other. She was going through a terrible 
struggle that brought her to the point of weeping like a little child. But she went away 
soothed and set at peace. 

1032 + During Holy Mass, I saw the Lord Jesus nailed upon the cross amidst great torments. A 
soft moan issued from His Heart. After some time, He said, I thirst. I thirst for the 
salvation of souls. Help Me, My daughter, to save souls. Join your sufferings to My 
Passion and offer them to the heavenly Father for sinners. 

1033 + When I see that the burden is beyond my strength, I do not consider or analyze it or 
probe into it, but I run like a child to the Heart of Jesus and say only one word to Him: "You 
can do all things." And then I keep silent, because I know that J esus himself will intervene 
in the matter, and as for me, instead of tormenting myself, I use that time to love Him. 



1034 Monday of Holy Week. I asked the Lord to let me take part in His Sorrowful Passion that I 
might experience in soul and body, to the extent that this is possible for a creature, His 
bitter Passion. I asked to experience all the bitterness, in so far as this was possible. And 
the Lord answered that He would give me this grace, and that on Thursday, after Holy 
Communion, He would grant this in a special way. 

1035 + This evening, a certain young man was dying; he was suffering terribly. For his intention, 

I began to say the chaplet which the Lord had taught me. I said it all, but the agony 
continued. I wanted to start the Litany of the Saints, but suddenly I heard the words, Say 
the chaplet. I understood that the soul needed the special help of prayers and great 
mercy. And so I locked myself in my room and fell prostrate before God and begged for 
mercy upon that soul. Then I felt the great majesty of God and His great justice. I trembled 
with fear, but did not stop begging the Lord's mercy for that soul. Then I took the cross off 
my breast, the crucifix I had received when making my vows, [ 1801 and I put it on the 
chest of the dying man and said to the Lord, "Jesus, look on this soul with the same love 
with which You looked on my holocaust on the day of my perpetual vows, and by the power

of the promise which You made to me in respect to the dying and those who would invoke 
Your mercy on them, [grant this man the grace of a happy death]." His suffering then 
ceased, and he died peacefully. Oh, how much we should pray for the dying! Let us take 
advantage of mercy while there is still time for mercy. 

1036 + I realize more and more how much every soul needs God's mercy throughout life and 
particularly at the hour of death. This chaplet mitigates God's anger, as He himself told me. 

1037 + I find myself so weak that were it not for Holy Communion I would fall continually. One 
thing alone sustains me, and that is Holy Communion. From it I draw my strength; in it is 
all my comfort. I fear life on days when I do not receive Holy Communion. I fear my own 
self. Jesus concealed in the Host is everything to me. From the tabernacle I draw strength, 
power, courage and light. Here, I seek consolation in time of anguish. I would not know how 
to give glory to God if I did not have the Eucharist in my heart. 

1038 + My beloved native land, Poland, if you only knew how many sacrifices and prayers I offer 
to God for you! But be watchful and give glory to God, who lifts you up and singles you out 
in a special way. But know how to be grateful. 

1039 + I suffer great pain at the sight of the sufferings of others. All these sufferings are 
reflected in my heart. I carry their torments in my heart so that it even wears me out 
physically. I would like all pains to fall upon me so as to bring relief to my neighbor. 

1040 Amid terrible torments, I fix my eyes on You, my God, and though a storm is gathering over 
my head, I know that the sun is not extinguished. Nor do I wonder at the deceitfulness of 
creatures, but I accept in advance whatever may happen. My lips are silent, while my ears 
are satiated with derision. I strive for silence in my heart amidst the greatest sufferings, 
and I protect myself against all attacks with the shield of Your Name. 


1041 An ardent desire for this Feast [ 1811 is burning up my whole soul. In fervent prayer for the 
hastening of the Feast I find some relief, and I have begun a novena for the intention of 
certain priests that God may grant them light and inspiration to apply for the promulgation 
of this Feast, and that the Spirit of God inspire the Holy Father regarding the entire matter. 

The novena consists of an hour of adoration before the Blessed Sacrament. I have implored 
God to hasten this Feast and have asked the Holy Spirit to inspire certain people regarding 
this whole matter. I am finishing this novena on Holy Thursday. 

1042 + March 23, 1937. Today is the seventh day of the novena. I have received a great and 
inconceivable grace: the Most Merciful Jesus has promised that I will be present at the 
celebration of this solemn Feast. 

1043 This day, the 23rd, that is, Tuesday of Holy Week, is a day on which the Lord has granted 
me many graces. 

1044 Suddenly, God's presence took hold of me, and at once I saw myself in Rome, in the Holy 
Father's chapel and at the same time I was in our chapel. And the celebration of the Holy 
Father and the entire Church was closely connected with our chapel and, in a very special 
way, with our Congregation. And I took part in the solemn celebration simultaneously here 
and in Rome, for the celebration was so closely connected with Rome that, even as I write, 

I cannot distinguish the two but I am writing it down as I saw it. I saw the Lord Jesus in our 
chapel, exposed in the monstrance on the high altar. The chapel was adorned as for a feast, 
and on that day anyone who wanted to come was allowed in. [ 182] The crowd was so 
enormous that the eye could not take it all in. Everyone was participating in the 
celebrations with great joy, and many of them obtained what they desired. The same 
celebration was held in Rome, in a beautiful church, and the Holy Father, with all the clergy, 
was celebrating this Feast, and then suddenly I saw Saint Peter, who stood between the 
altar and the Holy Father. I could not hear what Saint Peter said but I saw that the Holy 
Father understood his words.... 

1045 Then some clergymen whom I did not know began to examine me and to humiliate 

me, [1831 or rather, what I had written; but I saw how J esus himself was defending me and 
giving them to understand what they did not know. 

1046 Then suddenly, I saw how the two rays, as painted in the image, issued from the Host and

spread over the whole world. This lasted only a moment, but it seemed as though it had 
lasted all day, and our chapel was overcrowded all day long, and the whole day abounded in 
joy. 

1047 Then suddenly I saw on our altar the living Lord Jesus, just as He is depicted in the image. 
Yet I felt that the sisters and all the people did not see the Lord J esus as I saw Him. J esus 
looked with great kindness and joy at the Holy Father, at certain priests, at the entire 
clergy, at the people and at our Congregation. 


1048 Then, in an instant, I was caught up to stand near J esus, and I stood on the altar next to 
the Lord J esus, and my spirit was filled with a happiness so great that I am unable to 
comprehend it or write about it. A profound peace as well as repose filled my soul. Jesus 
bent toward me and said with great kindness, What is it you desire. My daughter? And I 
answered, "I desire worship and glory be given to Your mercy." I already am receiving 
worship by the institution and celebration of this Feast; what else do you desire? I 
then looked at the immense crowd worshiping The Divine Mercy and I said to the Lord, 
"Jesus, bless all those who are gathered to give glory to You and to venerate Your infinite 
mercy." J esus made a sign of the cross with His hand, and this blessing was reflected in the 
souls like a flash of light. My spirit was engulfed in His love. I felt as if I had dissolved and 
disappeared completely in God. When I came to myself, a profound peace was flooding my 
soul, and an extraordinary understanding of many things was communicated to my intellect, 
an understanding that had not been granted me previously. 

1049 I am immensely happy, although I am the least of all; and I would not change anything of 
what God has given me. I would not want to change places even with a Seraph, as regards 
the interior knowledge of God which He himself has given me. The intimate knowledge I 
have of the Lord is such as no creature can comprehend, particularly, the depth of His 
mercy that envelops me. I am happy with everything You give me. 

1050 March 24, 1937. Wednesday of Holy Week. My heart is languishing for God. I desire to 
become united with Him. A faint fear pierces my soul and at the same time a kind of flame 
of love sets my heart on fire. Love and suffering are united in my heart. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101- 50 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-521 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-1321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401-1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804- 1 828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 3 


1051 I have felt great sufferings in my body, but I feel the Lord is upholding me, for otherwise I 
would not be able to bear it. 

1052 0 my J esus, I beg You on behalf of the whole Church: Grant it love and the light of Your 
Spirit, and give power to the words of priests so that hardened hearts might be brought to 
repentance and return to You, 0 Lord. Lord, give us holy priests; You yourself maintain 
them in holiness. 0 Divine and Great High Priest, may the power of Your mercy accompany 
them everywhere and protect them from the devil's traps and snares which are continually 
being set for the souls of priests. May the power of Your mercy, 0 Lord, shatter and bring to 
naught all that might tarnish the sanctity of priests, for You can do all things. 

1053 March 25, 1937. Holy Thursday. During Holy Mass, I saw the Lord, who said to me, Lean 
your head on My breast and rest. The Lord pressed me to His Heart and said, I shall give 
you a small portion of My Passion, but do not be afraid, be brave; do not seek relief, but 
accept everything with submission to My will. 

1054 When Jesus was taking leave of me, such great pain filled my soul that it is impossible to 
express it. Physical strength left me; I left the chapel quickly and went to bed. I was

oblivious of what was going on around me. My soul was filled with longing for the Lord, and 
all the bitterness of His Divine Heart was imparted to me. This lasted for about three hours. 

I asked the Lord to protect me from the eyes of those around me. Although I wanted to, I 
could not take any food all day, until evening. 

I earnestly desired to spend the whole night with Jesus in the dark prison cell. ri84i I prayed 
until eleven o'clock. At eleven, the Lord said to me, Lie down and take your rest. I have 
let you experience in three hours what I suffered during the whole night. And 

immediately I went to bed. 

I had no physical strength left; the suffering had deprived me of it completely. Throughout 
all this time, I had been in a sort of swoon. Every beat of Jesus' Heart was reflected in my 
heart and pierced my soul. If these tortures had concerned me only, I would have suffered 
less; but as I looked at the One whom my heart has loved with all its might and saw that 
He was suffering, and that I could not bring Him any relief, my heart dissolved in love and 
bitterness. I was dying with Him, and yet I could not die. But I would not have exchanged 
that martyrdom for all the pleasures in the whole world. In the course of this suffering, my 
love grew immeasurably. I know that the Lord was supporting me with His omnipotence, for 
otherwise I would not have been able to endure it for even a moment. Together with Him, I 
underwent, in a special way, all the various tortures. The world still has no idea of all that 
Jesus suffered. I accompanied Him to the Garden of Gethsemane; I stayed with Him in the 
prison; I went with Him before the judges; I underwent with Him each of the tortures. Not a 
single one of His movements or looks escaped my notice. I came to know all the 
omnipotence of His love and of His mercy toward souls. 


1055 March 26, 1937. Friday. In the morning, I at once felt the torture of His five wounds in my 
body. This suffering continued until three o'clock. Although there is no outward sign of it, 
the torture is no less painful. I am glad that Jesus is