 as if I were perfectly well; the faintings and the weaknesses 
ceased. But as soon as I returned from the chapel, all the sufferings and weaknesses 
immediately returned, as if they had been waiting for me. But I had no fear of them at all, 
because I had been nourished by the Bread of the Strong. I boldly look at everything; even 
death itself I look straight in the eye. 

877 + 0 Jesus concealed in the Host, my sweet Master and faithful Friend, how happy my soul is 
to have such a Friend who always keeps me company. I do not feel lonely even though I am 
in isolation. Jesus-Host, we know each other-that is enough for me. 

878 January 12, 1937. Today, when the doctor [Adam Silberg] making his rounds came to see 
me, he somehow didn't like the way I looked. Naturally, I was suffering more, and so my 
temperature had gone up considerably. Consequently, he decided I must not go down for 
Holy Communion until my temperature dropped to normal. I said, "All right," although pain 
seized my heart; but I said I would go only if I had no fever. So he agreed to that. When the 
doctor left, I said to the Lord, "Jesus, now it is up to You whether I shall go or not," and I 
didn't think about it anymore, although the thought kept coming to my mind: I am not to 
have J esusno, that's impossible-and not just once but for several days, until my 
temperature drops. But in the evening, I said to the Lord, "Jesus, if my Communions are 
pleasing to You, I beg You humbly, grant that I have not one degree of fever tomorrow 
morning." 

I n the morning, as I was taking my temperature, I thought to myself, "If there is even one 
degree, I will not get up because that would be contrary to obedience." But when I looked at 
the thermometer, there wasn't even one degree of fever. I jumped to my feet at once and 
went to Holy Communion. When the doctor came and I told him that I had had not even one 
degree of fever, and so had gone to Holy Communion, he was surprised. I begged him not 
to make it difficult for me to go to Holy Communion, for it would have an adverse effect on 
the treatment. The doctor answered, "For peace of conscience and at the same time to avoid 
difficulties for yourself, Sister, let us make the following agreement: when the weather is 
fine, and it isn't raining, and you feel all right, then, Sister, please go; but you must weigh 
these matters in your conscience." It made me very happy that the doctor was being so 
considerate for my sake. You see, Jesus, that I have already done whatever was up to me; 
now I am counting on You and am quite at peace. 



879 I saw Father Andrasz as he was saying Holy Mass today. Before the Elevation, I saw the 

I nfant J esus with His hands spread out, and He was very joyous; then, after a moment, I 
saw nothing more. I was in my room and I continued making my thanksgiving. But later on, 

I thought to myself, "Why was the Infant Jesus so merry? After all, He is not always so 
merry when I see Him." Then I heard these words interiorly: Because I am very much at 
home in his heart. And I was not at all surprised at this, because I know he loves J esus 
very much. 

880 My union with the dying is still as close as ever. Oh, how incomprehensible is God's mercy

that the Lord allows me, by my unworthy prayer, to come to the aid of the dying. I try to be 
at the side of every dying person whenever I can. Have confidence in God, for He is good 
and inconceivable. His mercy surpasses our understanding. 

881 January 14, 1937. Today, Jesus entered my room wearing a bright robe and girded with a 
golden belt, His whole figure resplendent with great majesty. He said, My daughter, why 
are you giving in to thoughts of fear? I answered, "O Lord, You know why." And He said, 
Why? "This work frightens me. You know that I am incapable of carrying it out." And He 
said, Why? "You see very well that I am not in good health, that I have no education, that I 
have no money, that I am an abyss of misery, that I fear contacts with people. Jesus, I 
desire only You. You can release me from this." And the Lord said to me, My daughter, 
what you have said is true. You are very miserable, and it pleased Me to carry out 
this work of mercy precisely through you who are nothing but misery itself. Do not 
fear; I will not leave you alone. Do whatever you can in this matter; I will 
accomplish everything that is lacking in you. You know what is within your power 
to do; do that. The Lord looked into the depth of my being with great kindness; I thought I 
would die for joy under that gaze. The Lord disappeared, and joy, strength and power to act 
remained in my soul. But I was surprised that the Lord did not want to release me and that 
He is not changing anything He has once said. And despite all these joys, there is always a 
shadow of sorrow. I see that love and sorrow go hand in hand. 

882 I rarely have such visions. But I more often commune with the Lord in a more profound 
manner. My senses sleep and, although not in a visible way, all things become more real 
and clearer to me than if I saw them with my eyes. My intellect learns more in one moment 
than during long years of thinking and meditation, both as regards the essence of God and 
as regards revealed truths, and also as regards the knowledge of my own misery. 

883 Nothing disturbs my union with the Lord, neither conversation with others nor any duties; 
even if I am to go about settling very important matters, this does not disturb me. My spirit 
is with God, and my interior being is filled with God, so I do not look for Him outside myself. 
He, the Lord, penetrates my soul just as a ray from the sun penetrates clear glass. When I 
was enclosed in my mother's womb, I was not so closely united with her as I am with my 
God. There, it was an unawareness; but here, it is the fullness of reality and the 
consciousness of union. My visions are purely interior, but the more I understand them, the 
less I am able to express them in words. 

884 Oh, how beautiful is the world of the spirit! And so real that, by comparison, the exterior life 
is just a vain illusion and powerlessness. 



885 Jesus, give me the strength and wisdom to get through this terrible wilderness, that my 
heart may bear patiently this longing for You, O my Lord! I always remain in holy 
amazement when I sense that You are approaching me, You, the Lord of the awesome 
throne; that You descend to this miserable exile and visit this poor beggar who has nothing 
but misery! I do not know how to entertain You, my Royal Prince, but You know that I love 
You with every beat of my heart. I see how You lower yourself, but nevertheless Your 
majesty does not diminish in my eyes. I know that You love me with the love of a 
bridegroom, and that is enough for me. Although we are separated by a great chasm, for 
You are the Creator and I am Your creature, nevertheless, love alone explains our union. 
Without it, all is incomprehensible. Only love makes it possible to understand these 
incomprehensible intimacies with which You visit me. O J esus, Your greatness terrifies me, 
and I would be in constant astonishment and fear, if You yourself did not set me at peace. 
You make me capable of communing with You before each approach. 

886 January 15, 1937. Sorrow will not establish itself in a heart which loves the will of God. My 
heart, longing for God, feels the whole misery of exile. I keep going forward bravely-though 
my feet become wounded-to my homeland and, on the way, I nourish myself on the will of 
God. It is my food. Help me, happy inhabitants of the heavenly homeland, so that your

sister may not falter on the way. Although the desert is fearful, I walk with lifted head and 
eyes fixed on the sun; that is to say, on the merciful Heart of Jesus. 

887 January 19, 1937. My life at present flows on in peaceful awareness of God. My silent soul 
lives on Him, and this conscious life of God in my soul is for me a source of happiness and 
strength. I do not look for happiness outside the depths of my soul in which God dwells; of 
this I am aware. I feel a certain need to share myself with others. I have discovered a 
fountain of happiness in my soul, and it is God. O my God, I see that everything that 
surrounds me is filled with God, and most of all my own soul, which is adorned with the 
grace of God. Already now, I will begin to live on that on which I shall live for all eternity. 

888 Silence is so powerful a language that it reaches the throne of the living God. Silence is His 
language, though secret, yet living and powerful. 

889 Jesus, You have given me to know and understand in what a soul's greatness consists: not 
in great deeds but in great love. Love has its worth, and it confers greatness on all our 
deeds. Although our actions are small and ordinary in themselves, because of love they 
become great and powerful before God. 

890 Love is a mystery that transforms everything it touches into things beautiful and pleasing to 
God. The love of God makes a soul free. She is like a queen; she knows no slavish 
compulsion; she sets about everything with great freedom of soul, because the love which 
dwells in her incites her to action. Everything that surrounds her makes her know that only 
God himself is worthy of her love. A soul in love with God and immersed in Him approaches 
her duties with the same dispositions as she does Holy Communion and carries out the 
simplest tasks with great care, under the loving gaze of God. She is not troubled if, after 
some time, something turns out to be less successful. She remains calm, because at the 
time of the action she had done what was in her power. When it happens that the living 
presence of God, which she enjoys almost constantly, leaves her, she then tries to continue 
living in lively faith. Her soul understands that there are periods of rest and periods of 
battle. Through her will, she is always with God. Her soul, like a knight, is well trained in 
battle; from afar it sees where the foe is hiding and is ready for battle. She knows she is not 
alone-God is her strength. 



891 January 21, [1937]. Since early morning today, I have been wondrously united with the 
Lord. In the evening, the hospital chaplain visited me. After we had talked for a while, I felt 
my spirit beginning to immerse itself in God, and I began to lose all sense of what was 
happening around me. I ardently implored Jesus, "Give me the ability to talk." And the Lord 
granted that I could talk freely with him. But there was a moment when I could not 
understand what the priest was saying. I heard his voice, but it was impossible for me to 
understand him, and I apologized for not understanding him although I could hear his voice. 
This is a moment of the grace of union with God, but imperfect, because exteriorly the 
senses are acting imperfectly too. There is no total immersion in God; that is, suspension of 
the senses, as often happens when one neither sees nor hears anything exteriorly, the 
whole soul being freely absorbed in God. When such a grace visits me, I want to be alone, 
and I ask Jesus to protect me from the eyes of creatures. I was really very embarrassed 
before the priest, but I was reassured, because he got to know a little of my soul in 
confession. 

892 Today the Lord gave me to know, in spirit, about the Convent of Divine Mercy. I saw a great 
spirit in this convent, but everything was poor and very scanty. O my Jesus, you are 
allowing me to live in spirit with these souls, but perhaps I shall never set foot there; but 
may Your Name be blessed, and whatever You have intended, may it be done. 

893 J anuary 22, [1937]. Today is Friday. My soul is in a sea of suffering. Sinners have taken 
everything away from me. But that is all right; I have given everything away for their sake 
that they might know that You are good and infinitely merciful. I shall be faithful to You, 
come rain or shine. 

894 Today the doctor decided that I am not to go to Mass, but only to Holy Communion. I

wanted very much to assist at Mass, but my confessor, r 1621 in agreement with the doctor, 
told me to obey. "It is God's will, Sister, that you should get well, and you must not 
undertake mortifications of any kind. Be obedient, Sister, and God will reward you for it." I 
felt that the confessor's words were J esus' words, and although it made me sad to miss Holy 
Mass, during which God had been granting me the grace of seeing the I nfant J esus; 
nevertheless, I placed obedience above everything else. 

I became absorbed in prayer and said my penance. Then I suddenly saw the Lord, who said 

to me, My daughter, know that you give Me greater glory by a single act of 
obedience than by long prayers and mortifications. Oh, how good it is to live under 
obedience, to live conscious of the fact that everything I do is pleasing to God! 

895 J anuary 23, [1937]. I did not feel like writing today. Then I heard a voice in my soul: My 

daughter, you do not live for yourself but for souls; write for their benefit. You 
know that My will as to your writing has been confirmed many times by your 
confessors. You know what is pleasing to Me, and if you have any doubts about 
what I am saying, you also know whom you are to ask. I grant him light to 
pronounce judgment on my case. My eye watches over him. My daughter, you are 
to be like a child towards him, full of simplicity and candor. Put his judgment 
above all My demands. He will guide you according to My will. If he doesn't allow 
you to carry out My demands, be at peace; I will not judge you, but the matter will 
remain between Me and him. You are to be obedient. 


896 January 25, 1937. Today my soul is steeped in bitterness. 0 Jesus, 0 my Jesus, today 
everyone can add to my cup of bitterness. It makes no difference whether they be friend or 
foe, they can all inflict suffering on me. And You, 0 Jesus, are bound to give me strength 
and power in these difficult moments. 0 Blessed Host, support me and seal my lips against 
all murmuring and complaint. When I am silent, I know I shall be victorious. 

897 January 27, 1937. I feel considerable improvement in my health. Jesus is bringing me from 
the gates of death to life, because there was so little left but for me to die, and lo, the Lord 
grants me the fullness of life. Although I am still to remain in the sanatorium, I am almost 
completely well. I see that the will of God has not yet been fulfilled in me, and that is why I 
must live, for I know that if I fulfill everything the Lord has planned for me in this world, He 
will not leave me in exile any longer, for heaven is my home. But before we go to our 
Homeland, we must fulfill the will of God on earth; that is, trials and struggles must run 
their full course in us. 

898 O my Jesus, You are giving me back my health and life; give me also strength for battle, 
because I am unable to do anything without You. Give me strength, for You can do all 
things. You see that I am a frail child, and what can I do? I know the full power of Your 
mercy, and I trust that You will give me everything Your feeble child needs. 

899 I have desired death so much! I do not know whether I shall ever again in my life 
experience such great longing for God. There have been times when I fell into a swoon for 
Him. Oh, how ugly the earth when one knows heaven! I must do violence to myself in order 
to live. O will of God, you are my nourishment. 

900 Oh, how drab and full of misunderstandings is this life! My patience is exercised, and after it 
comes experience. I understand and learn many things each day and see that I know very 
little, and I am constantly discovering faults in my conduct. Still, I am not discouraged by 
this, but thank God that He deigns to grant me His light that I may know myself. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-52] 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801 -850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1 151-1200 t 1 201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-132 1 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 - 1450 t 1 451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804- 828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission.

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 


Notebook 2 


901 + There is a certain person [Stanislava Kwietniewska r i63i 1 who tests my patience. I must 
devote much time to her. When I talk with her, I feel that she is lying, and this, continually. 
And because she tells me about things far away which I cannot verify, she is able to get 
away with the lie. But I am inwardly convinced that there is no truth in what she says. When 
it occurred to me once that I might be mistaken and that she might be telling the truth, I 
asked the Lord J esus to give me the following sign: if she is really lying, let her admit to me 
herself that she has lied about any one of the things ; concerning which I am inwardly 
convinced that she is lying. And if she is telling the truth, let the Lord J esus take this 
conviction away from me. A little later, she came to me again and said, "Sister, I beg your 
forgiveness, but I have lied about such and such a thing," and I understood that the inner 
light concerning that person had not misled me. 

902 January 29, 1937. I overslept today. A little longer, and I would have been too late for Holy 
Communion because the chapel is a good distance from our section, r i 64 i When I went 
outdoors, the snow was knee-deep. But before it occurred to me that the doctor would not 
have allowed ! me to go out in such snow, I had already come to the Lord in the chapel. I 
received Holy Communion and was back in no time. I heard these words in my soul: My 
daughter, rest close to My Heart. Known to Me are your efforts. My soul is more joyful 
when I am close to the Heart of my God. 

January 30, 1937. One-day retreat. 

903 I am coming to know God's greatness more and more and to rejoice in Him. I remain 
unceasingly with Him in the depths of my heart. It is in my own soul that I most easily find 
God. 

904 During my meditation, I heard these words: My daughter, you give Me most glory by 
patiently submitting to My will, and you win for yourself greater merit than that 
which any fast or mortification could ever gain for you. Know, My daughter, that if 
you submit your will to Mine, you draw upon yourself My special delight. This 
sacrifice is pleasing to Me and full of sweetness. I take great pleasure in it; there is 
power in it. 

905 + Examination of conscience: continuation of the same, to unite myself to the Merciful Christ. 
Practice: interior silence; that is, strict observance of silence. 

906 + In difficult moments, I will fix my gaze upon the silent Heart of Jesus, stretched upon the 
Cross, and from the exploding flames of His merciful Heart, will flow down upon me power 
and strength to keep fighting. 


907 An extraordinary thing, [that] in winter a canary comes to my window and sings beautifully 
for a while. I have tried to check whether there is a canary in a cage somewhere around, but 
there is none anywhere, not even in the neighboring ward. One of the other patients also 
heard it, but only once, and wondered how a canary could be singing in this freezing season 
of the year. 

908 + 0 Jesus, how sorry I feel for poor sinners. Jesus, grant them contrition and repentance. 
Remember Your own sorrowful Passion. I know Your infinite mercy and cannot bear it that a 
soul that has cost You so much should perish. Jesus, give me the souls of sinners; let Your 
mercy rest upon them. Take everything away from me, but give me souls. I want to become 
a sacrificial host for sinners. Let the shell of my body conceal my offering, for Your Most 
Sacred Heart is also hidden in a Host, and certainly You are a living sacrifice. 

Transform me into Yourself, O Jesus, that I may be a living sacrifice and pleasing to You. I 
desire to atone at each moment for poor sinners. The sacrifice of my spirit is hidden under 
the veil of the body; the human eye does not perceive it, and for that reason it is pure and 
pleasing to You. 0 my Creator and Father of great mercy, I trust in You, for You are 
Goodness Itself. Souls, do not be afraid of God, but trust in Him, for He is good, and His 
mercy is everlasting. 

909 + We know each other mutually, 0 Lord, in the dwelling of my heart. Yes, now it is I who am 
receiving You as a Guest in the little home of my heart, but the time is coming when You will 
call me to Your dwelling place, which You have prepared for me from the beginning of the

world. Oh, what am I compared to You, O Lord? 

910 The Lord is leading me into a world unknown to me. He makes known to me His great grace, 
but I am afraid of it and will not submit to its influence in so far as it may be in my power, 
until I am assured by my spiritual director as to what this grace is. 

911 On one occasion, God's presence pervaded my whole being, and my mind was mysteriously 
enlightened in respect to His Essence. He allowed me to understand His interior life. In spirit, 

I saw the Three Divine Persons, but Their Essence was One. He is One, and One only, but in 
Three Persons; none of Them is either greater or smaller; there is no difference in either 
beauty or sanctity, for They are One. They are absolutely One. His Love transported me into 
this knowledge and united me with Himself. When I was united to One, I was equally united 
to the Second and to the Third in such a way that when we are united with One, by that very 
fact, we are equally united to the two Persons in the same way as with the One. Their will is 
One, one God, though in Three Persons. When One of the Three Persons communicates with 
a soul, by the power of that one will, it finds itself united with the Three Persons and is 
inundated in the happiness flowing from the Most Holy Trinity, the same happiness that 
nourishes the saints. This same happiness that streams from the Most Holy Trinity makes all 
creation happy; from it springs that life which vivifies and bestows all life which takes its 
beginning from Him. In these moments, my soul experienced such great divine delights that 

I find this difficult to express. 



912 Then I heard the following words spoken thus: I want you to be My spouse. Fear pierced 
my soul, but I calmly continued to reflect on what sort of an espousal this could be. However, 
each time fear would invade my soul, a power from on high would give it peace. After all, I 
have taken perpetual vows, and I have taken them of my own completely free will. And so I 
continued to reflect on what this could mean. I sensed, and came to realize, that this was 
some special kind of grace. Whenever I think about it, I feel faint for God, but in this 
swooning, my mind is clear and penetrated with light. When I am united to Him, I faint from 
an abundance of happiness, but my mind is bright and clear and free from all shadows. You 
abase Your majesty to dwell with a poor creature. Thank you, 0 Lord, for this great grace 
that makes it possible for me to commune with You. Jesus, Your Name is my delight, I have 

a presentiment of my Beloved from afar, and my languishing soul rests in His embrace; I 
don't know how to live without Him. I would rather be with Him in afflictions and suffering 
than without Him in the greatest heavenly delights. 

913 February 2, 1937. Today, from early morning, Divine absorption penetrates my soul. During 
Mass, I thought I would seethe little Jesus, as I often do; however, today during Holy Mass I 
saw the Crucified J esus. J esus was nailed to the cross and was in great agony. His suffering 
pierced me, soul and body, in a manner which was invisible, but nevertheless most painful. 

914 Oh, what awesome mysteries take place during Mass! A great mystery is accomplished in the 
Holy Mass. With what great devotion should we listen to and take part in this death of Jesus. 
One day we will know what God is doing for us in each Mass, and what sort of gift He is 
preparing in it for us. Only His divine love could permit that such a gift be provided for us. O 
Jesus, my Jesus, with what great pain is my soul pierced when I see this fountain of life 
gushing forth with such sweetness and power for each soul, while at the same time I see 
souls withering away and drying up through their own fault. O Jesus, grant that the power of 
mercy embrace these souls. 

915 + O Mary, today a terrible sword has pierced Your holy soul. Except for God, no one knows of 
Your suffering. Your soul does not break; it is brave, because it is with Jesus. Sweet Mother, 
unite my soul to Jesus, because it is only then that I will be able to endure all trials and 
tribulations, and only in union with Jesus will my little sacrifices be pleasing to God. Sweetest 
Mother, continue to teach me about the interior life. May the sword of suffering never break 
me. 0 pure Virgin, pour courage into my heart and guard it. 

916 This day is so special for me; even though I encountered so many sufferings, my soul is

overflowing with great joy. I n a private room next to mine, there was a J ewish woman who 
was seriously ill. I went to see her three days ago and was deeply pained at the thought that 
she would soon die without having her soul cleansed by the grace of Baptism. I had an 
understanding with her nurse, a [religious] Sister, that when her last moment would be 
approaching, she would baptize her. There was this difficulty however, that there were 
always some Jewish people with her. However, I felt inspired to pray before the image which 
Jesus had instructed me to have painted. I have a leaflet with the Image of the Divine Mercy 
on the cover. And I said to the Lord, "J esus, You yourself told me that You would grant many 
graces through this image. I ask You, then, for the grace of Holy Baptism for this J ewish 
lady. It makes no difference who will baptize her, as long as she is baptized. 

After these words, I felt strangely at peace, and I was quite sure that, despite the difficulties, 
the waters of Holy Baptism would be poured upon her soul. That night, when she was very 
low, I got out of bed three times to see her, watching for the right moment to give her this 
grace. The next morning, she seemed to feel a little better. In the afternoon her last moment 



began to approach. The Sister who was her nurse said that Baptism would be difficult 
because they were with her. The moment came when the sick woman began to lose 
consciousness, and as a result, in order to save her, they began to run about; some [went] 
to fetch the doctor, while others went off in other directions to find help. 

And so the patient was left alone, and Sister baptized her, and before they had all rushed 
back, her soul was beautiful, adorned with God's grace. Her final agony began immediately, 
but it did not last long. It was as if she fell asleep. All of a sudden, I saw her soul ascending 
to heaven in wondrous beauty. Oh, how beautiful is a soul with sanctifying grace! Joy flooded 
my heart that before this image I had received so great a grace for this soul. 

917 Oh, how great is God's mercy; let every soul praise it. O my Jesus, that soul for all eternity 
will be singing You a hymn of mercy. I shall not forget the impression this day has made on 
my soul. This is the second great grace which I have received here for souls before this 
image. 

Oh, how good the Lord is, and how full of compassion; Jesus, how heartily I thank You for 
these graces. 

918 February 5, 1937. My J esus, in spite of everything, I desire very much to unite myself to You. 
Jesus, if this be possible, take me to Yourself, for it seems to me that my heart will burst of 
longing for You! 

Oh, how very much I feel that I am in exile! When will I find myself in the house of our 
Father, delighting in the happiness that streams from the Most Holy Trinity? But, if it is Your 
will that I still go on living and suffering, then I desire what You have destined for me. Keep 
me here on earth for as long as You wish, even though this be until the end of the world. 0 
will of my Lord, be my delight and the rapture of my soul. Although the earth is so filled with 
people, I feel all alone, and the earth is a terrible desert to me. 0 Jesus, Jesus, You know and 
understand the fervors of my heart; You, O Lord, alone can fill me. 

919 + Today, when I warned a certain young lady that she should not be standing for hours in 
the corridor with the men, because it was unbecoming for a well-bred young lady to do so, 
she apologized and promised to correct herself. She began to cry when she became aware of 
her thoughtlessness. As I was saying these few things to her concerning moral behavior, all 
the men from the ward came over and listened to my words of advice. The Jewish people 
even heard a few things about themselves. A certain person told me afterwards that they put 
their ears against the wall and listened attentively. I somehow felt they were listening, but I 
said what I had to say. The walls are so thin here that one can be heard, even when 
speaking in a low voice. 

920 +There is a woman here ri 65 i who was once one of our students. Naturally, she puts my 
patience to the test. She comes to see me several times a day. After each of these visits I 
am tired out, but I see that the Lord Jesus has sent that soul to me. Let everything glorify 
You, 0 Lord. Patience gives glory to God. 0 how poor the souls are!

921 February 6, [1937]. Today, the Lord said to me, My daughter, I am told that there is 
much simplicity in you, so why do you not tell Me about everything that concerns 
you, even the smallest details? Tell Me about everything, and know that this will 
give Me great joy. I answered, "But You know about everything, Lord. " And J esus replied to 

me, Yes, I do know; but you should not excuse yourself with the fact that I know, 
but with childlike simplicity talk to Me about everything, for My ears and heart are 
inclined towards you, and your words are dear to Me. 

922 + When I began this big novena for three intentions, I saw a tiny insect on the ground and 
thought: how did it get here in the middle of winter? Then I heard the following words in my 
soul: You see, I am thinking of it and sustaining it, and what is it compared to you? 
Why was your soul fearful for a moment? I apologized to the Lord for that moment. 

Jesus wants me to always be a child and to leave all care to Him, and to submit blindly to His 
holy will. He took everything upon Himself. 

923 February 7, [1937]. Today, the Lord said to me, I demand of you a perfect and whole- 
burnt offering; an offering of the will. No other sacrifice can compare with this one. 

I myself am directing your life and arranging things in such a way that you will be 
for Me a continual sacrifice and will always do My will. And for the accomplishment 
of this offering, you will unite yourself with Me on the Cross. I know what you can 
do. I myself will give you many orders directly, but I will delay the possibility of 
their being carried out and make it depend on others. But what the superiors will 
not manage to do, I myself will accomplish directly in your soul. And in the most 
hidden depths of your soul, a perfect holocaust will be carried out, not just for a 
while, but know. My daughter, that this offering will last until your death. But there 
is time, so that I the Lord will fulfill all your wishes. I delight in you as in a living 
host; let nothing terrify you; I am with you. 

924 Today, I received a note from Mother Superior forbidding me to go to the bedside of the 
dying. And so, I will send to the dying obedience in place of self, and it will support the souls 
who are dying. Such is God's will, and that is enough for me. That which I cannot understand 
now I will learn later. 

925 February 7, 1937. Today, I prayed more fervently than ever for the Holy Father [Pius XI ] and 
three priests r i66i that God would inspire them as to what He is asking of me, for the 
realization of this depends on them. Oh, how happy I am that the Holy Father's health is 
improving. Today I heard him addressing the Eucharistic Congress, r i 67 i and I went there in 
spirit to receive the Apostolic Blessing. 

926 February 9, [ 1937]. Shrove Tuesday. During the last two days of the carnival, I experienced 
the overwhelming flood of chastisements and sins. In one instant the Lord gave me a 
knowledge of the sins committed throughout the whole world during these days. I fainted 
from fright, and even though I know the depth of God's mercy, I was surprised that God 
allows humanity to exist. And the Lord gave me to know who it is that upholds the existence 
of mankind: it is the chosen souls. When the number of the chosen ones is complete, the 
world will cease to exist. 


927 On these two days, I received Holy Communion as an act of reparation, and I said to the 
Lord, "Jesus, I offer everything today for sinners. Let the blows of Your justice fall on me, 
and the sea of Your mercy engulf the poor sinners." And the Lord heard my prayer: many 
souls returned to the Lord, but I was in agony under the yoke of God's justice. I felt I was 
the object of the anger of the Most High God. By evening my sufferings had reached such a 
stage of interior desolation that moans welled up involuntarily from my breast. I locked the 
door of my room and began an adoration; that is to say, a Holy Hour. Interior desolation and 
an experience of God's justice-that was my prayer; and the moans and pain that welled up 
from my soul took the place of a sweet conversation with the Lord. 

928 Then suddenly I saw the Lord, who clasped me to His Heart and said to me, My daughter, 
do not weep, for I cannot bear your tears. I will grant you everything you ask for, 
but stop crying. And I was filled with great joy, and my spirit, as usual, was drowned in

Him as in its only treasure. Today, encouraged by His kindness, I conversed with Jesus at 
greater length. 

929 When I had rested near His sweetest Heart, I told Him, "Jesus, I have so much to tell You." 
And the Lord said to me with great love, Speak, My daughter. And I started to enumerate 
the pains of my heart; that is, how greatly concerned I am for all mankind, that "they all do 
not know You, and those who do know You do not love You as You deserve to be loved. I also 
see how terribly sinners offend You; and then again, I see how severely the faithful, 
especially Your servants, are oppressed and persecuted. And then, too, I see many souls 
rushing headlong into the terrible abyss of hell. You see, Jesus, this is the pain that gnaws at 
my heart and bones. And, although You show me special love and inundate my heart with 
streams of Your joys, nevertheless, this does not appease the sufferings I have just 
mentioned, but rather they penetrate my poor heart all the more acutely. Oh, how ardently I 
desire that all mankind turn with trust to Your mercy. Then, seeing the glory of Your name, 
my heart will be comforted." 

Jesus listened to these outpourings of my heart with gravity and interest, as if He had known 
nothing about them, and this seemed to make it easier for me to talk. And the Lord said to 

me, My daughter, those words of your heart are pleasing to Me, and by saying the 
chaplet you are bringing humankind closer to Me. After these words, I found myself 
alone, but the presence of God is always in my soul. 

930 + O my Jesus, although I will go to You, and You will fill me with Yourself, and that will make 
my happiness complete, I will nevertheless not forget about humanity. I desire to draw aside 
the veils of heaven, so that the earth would have no doubts about The Divine Mercy. My 
repose is in proclaiming Your mercy. The soul gives the greatest glory to its Creator when it 
turns with trust to The Divine Mercy. 

931 February 10, [1937]. Today is Ash Wednesday. 


During Holy Mass, I felt for a short time the Passion of Jesus in my members. Lent is a very 
special time for the work of priests. We should assist them in rescuing souls. 



932 A few days ago, I wrote to my director [probably Father Andrasz r i68i 1 . asking permission for 
some little mortifications during Lent. As I did not have the doctor's permission to go to 
town, I had to do this by letter. But Ash Wednesday is already here, and I still have no 
answer. This morning after Holy Communion, I asked Jesus to inspire my director with His 
light so that he would answer me, and I knew in my soul that Father was not against my 
practicing these mortifications for which I had asked permission, and that he would give his 
permission. So, in peace, I began to undertake these practices. That same afternoon I 
received a letter from Father, saying that he readily gives me permission to undertake those 
practices for which I had asked permission. I was very pleased that my interior knowledge 
was in agreement with my spiritual Father's opinion. 

933 Then I heard the following words in my soul: You will receive a greater reward for your 
obedience and subjection to your confessor than you will for the practices which 
you will be carrying out. Know this. My daughter, and act accordingly: anything, no 
matter how small it be, that has the seal of obedience to My representative is 
pleasing to Me and great in My eyes. 

934 Small practices for Lent. Although I wish and desire to do so, I cannot practice big 
mortifications as before, because I am under the strict surveillance of the doctor. But I can 
practice little things: first-sleep without a pillow; keep myself a little hungry; every day, with 
my arms outstretched, say the chaplet which the Lord taught me; occasionally, with arms 
outstretched, for an indefinite period of time pray informally. Intention: to beg divine mercy 
for poor sinners, and for priests, the power to bring sinful hearts to repentance. 

935 My contact with the dying is, just as it has been in the past, very close. I often accompany a 
person who is dying far away, but my greatest joy is when I see the promise of mercy 
fulfilled in these souls. The Lord is faithful; what He once ordains-He fulfills. 

936 + A certain person in our ward was beginning to die. Amidst terrible tortures, she was dying 
for three days, sometimes regaining consciousness. Everyone in the ward was praying for

her. I longed to go to her, but Mother Superior had forbidden me to go to visit the dying, so I 
prayed for that poor soul in my room. But when I heard that she was still in agony, and there 
was no saying how long it was going to take, I suddenly felt inspired in my soul and said to 
the Lord, "J esus, if all I do is pleasing to You, I ask You, as evidence, to let that soul stop 
suffering and pass on immediately to her happy eternity." A few minutes later I learned that 
the person had passed away so peacefully and quickly that they did not even have time to 
light the candle. 

937 + I will say a word more about my spiritual director [Father Andrasz or Father Sopocko ri69i 1. 
It is strange that there are so few priests who know how to pour power, strength and 
courage into a soul so that it can make constant progress without getting tired. Under such 
direction a soul, even of lesser strength, can do much for the glory of God. And here I 
discovered a secret; namely, that the confessor, or rather the spiritual director, does not 
make light of the trifles that the soul brings to him. And when the soul notices that it is being 
controlled in this, it begins to exert itself and does not omit the slightest opportunity to 
practice virtue and also avoids the smallest faults. And from these efforts, as with little 
stones, there rises within the soul a most beautiful temple. On the contrary, if the soul 
notices that the confessor neglects these little things, it likewise neglects them and ceases to 
give an account of them to the confessor and, worse still, will begin to grow negligent in little 
things. Thus, instead of going forward, it gradually retreats backward and becomes aware of 
the situation only when it has already fallen into some serious trouble. Here, a serious 


question poses itself: who is at fault, the soul in question or the confessor; that is to say, the 
director? It seems to me that all the blame should be put on the imprudent director; the 
soul's only fault is to have taken upon itself the choice of a director. ! The director could well 
have led the soul along the road of God's will to sanctity. 

938 The soul should have prayed ardently and at greater length for a director and should have 
asked the Lord himself to choose a spiritual director for it. What begins in God will be godly, 
and what begins in a purely human manner will remain human. God is so merciful that, in 
order to help a soul He himself chooses the spiritual guide and will enlighten the soul 
concerning the one before whom it should uncover the most hidden depths of its soul just as 
it sees itself before the Lord J esus himself. And when the soul considers and recognizes that 
God has been arranging all this, it should pray fervently for the confessor that he might have 
the divine light to know it well. And let it not change such a director except for a serious 
reason. Just as it had prayed fervently and at great length in order to learn God's will before 
choosing a director, so too should it pray fervently and at great length to discern whether it 
is truly God's will that he leave this director and choose another. If God's will is not 
absolutely clear, he should not make this change, for a person will not go far by himself, and 
Satan wants just this: to have the person who is aspiring for sanctity direct himself because 
then, without doubt, he will never attain it. 

939 There is an exception [to this], and that is when God himself directs the person, but the 
director will immediately recognize that the person in question is being guided by God 
himself. God will allow him to know this clearly and distinctly, and such a person should be 
even more under the director's control than anyone else. In this case, the director does not 
so much guide and point out the road along which the soul is to journey; but rather, he 
judges and confirms that the soul is following the right path and is being led by a good spirit. 

In this situation, the director should be not only holy, but also experienced and prudent, and 
the soul should give priority to his opinion over that of God himself, for then the soul will be 
safe from illusions and deviations. A soul that will not fully submit its inspirations to the strict 
control of the Church; that is, to the director, clearly shows by this that a bad spirit is guiding 
it. The director should be extremely prudent in such cases and test the soul's obedience.

Satan can even clothe himself in a cloak of humility, but he does not know how to wear the 
cloak of obedience and thus his evil designs will be disclosed. But the director should not be 
overly afraid of such a soul, because if God puts that special soul in his care, He will also give 
him great divine light regarding it, for otherwise how could he deal wisely with the great 
mysteries which take place between the soul and God. 

940 I myself suffered a great deal and was much tried in this respect. Therefore, I am writing 
only about what I myself have experienced. It was only after many novenas, prayers and 
penances that God sent me a priest who understood my soul. Oh, there would be many more 
saintly souls if there were more experienced and saintly confessors. Many a soul, earnestly 
striving for sanctity, cannot manage by itself during times of trial and abandons the road to 
perfection. 

941 O J esus, give us fervent and holy priests! Oh, how great is the dignity of the priest, but at 
the same time, how great is his responsibility! Much has been given you, O priest, but much 
will also be demanded of you.... 



942 February 11, [1937]. Today is Friday. During Mass, I suffered pain in my body: in my hands, 
my feet and my side. Jesus is sending me this kind of suffering that I may make reparation 
for sinners. The pain is brief, but very severe. I do not suffer for more than a couple of 
minutes, but the impression remains for a long time and is very vivid. 

943 + Today, I feel such desolation in my soul that I do not know how to explain it even to 
myself. I would like to hide from people and cry endlessly. No one understands a heart 
wounded by love, and when such a heart feels itself abandoned interiorly, no one can 
comfort it. 0 souls of sinners, you have taken the Lord away from me, but all right, all right; 
you get to know how sweet the Lord is, and let the whole sea of bitterness flood my heart. I 
have given all my divine comforts to you. 

944 + There are moments when I mistrust myself, when I feel my own weakness and 
wretchedness in the most profound depths of my own being, and I have noticed that I can 
endure such moments only by trusting in the infinite mercy of God. Patience, prayer and 
silence-these are what give strength to the soul. There are moments when one should be 
silent, and when it would be inappropriate to talk with creatures; these are the moments 
when one is dissatisfied with oneself, and when the soul feels as weak as a little child. Then 
the soul clings to God with all its might. At such times, I live solely by faith, and when I feel 
strengthened by God's grace, then I am more courageous in speaking and communicating 
with my neighbors. 

945 In the evening, the Lord said to me, My child, rest on My Heart; I see that you have 

worked hard in My vineyard. And my soul was flooded with divine joy. 

946 February 12, [1937]. Today, the presence of God is piercing me through and through, like a 
ray from the sun. My soul is longing for God so intensely that I fall into a swoon every now 
and then. I feel Eternal Love touching my heart, and my littleness cannot bear it, and this 
causes me to swoon. Still, my interior strength is great, and my soul wants to match the 
Love with which it is loved. The soul at such moments has a very deep knowledge of God, 
and the more it comes to know Him, the purer and more fervent does its love for Him 
become. How unfathomable are the mysteries of the soul and God! 

947 Sometimes there are whole hours when my soul is lost in wonder at seeing the infinite 
majesty of God abasing Itself to the level of my soul. Unending is my interior astonishment 
that the Most High Lord is pleased in me and tells me so Himself. And I immerse myself even 
deeper in my nothingness, because I know what I am of myself. Still I must say that I, in 
return, love my Creator to folly with every beat of my heart and with every nerve; my soul 
unconsciously drowns, drowns... in Him. I feel that nothing will separate me from the Lord, 
neither heaven nor earth, neither the present nor the future. Everything may change, but 
love never, never; it is always the same. He, the Immortal Mighty One, makes His will known 
to me that I may love Him very specially, and He himself makes my soul capable of the kind 
of love with which He wants me to love Him. I bury myself more and more in Him, and I fear 
nothing.

Love has overtaken my whole heart, and even if I were to be told of God's justice and of how 
even the pure spirits tremble and cover their faces before Him, saying endlessly, "Holy," 
which would seem to suggest that my familiarity with God would be to the detriment of His 
honor and majesty, [I would reply,] "0 no, no, and once again, no!" In pure love, there is 
room for everything: the highest praise and the deepest adoration, yet the soul is immersed 
in Him in deepest peace through love; and the words of people, speaking from the exterior, 



have no effect upon that soul. What they tell the soul about God is but a pale shadow in 
comparison to its own experience of Him; and it is often surprised how other people can be 
struck with admiration at what someone else says about God when, for this soul, it is nothing 
special, as it knows that what can be put into words is not yet that great. So this soul listens 
to everything with respect, but has its own special life in God. 

948 February 13, [1937]. Today, during the Passion Service, ri7oi I saw Jesus being tortured and 
crowned with thorns and holding a reed in His hand. Jesus was silent as the soldiers were 
bustling about, vying with each other in torturing Him. Jesus said nothing, but just looked at 
me, and in that gaze I felt His pain, so terrible that we have not the faintest idea of how 
much He suffered for us before He was crucified. My soul was filled with pain and longing; in 
my soul, I felt great hatred for sin, and even the smallest infidelity on my part seemed to me 
like a huge mountain for which I must expiate by mortification and penance. When I see 
J esus tormented, my heart is torn to pieces, and I think: what will become of sinners if they 
do not take advantage of the Passion of Jesus? In His Passion, I see a whole sea of mercy. 

+ J.M.J. February 12, 1937 

+ The Love of God is the flower - Mercy the fruit. 


949 Let the doubting soul read these considerations on Divine Mercy and become trusting, rmi 
Divine Mercy, gushing forth from the bosom of the Father, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, greatest attribute of God, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, incomprehensible mystery, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, fount gushing forth from the mystery of the Most Blessed Trinity, I trust in 
You. 


vine Mercy, unfathomed by any intellect, human or angelic, I trust in You. 
vine Mercy, from which wells forth all life and happiness, I trust in You. 
vine Mercy, better than the heavens, I trust in You. 
vine Mercy, source of miracles and wonders, I trust in You. 
vine Mercy, encompassing the whole universe, I trust in You. 

vine Mercy, descending to earth in the Person of the Incarnate Word, I trust in You. 

vine Mercy, which flowed out from the open wound of the Heart of Jesus, I trust in You. 

vine Mercy, enclosed in the Heart of Jesus for us, and especially for sinners, I trust in You. 

vine Mercy, unfathomed in the institution of the Sacred Host, I trust in You. 

vine Mercy, in the founding of Holy Church, I trust in You. 

vine Mercy, in the Sacrament of Holy Baptism, I trust in You. 

vine Mercy, in our justification through J esus Christ, I trust in You. 


Divine Mercy, accompanying us through our whole life, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, embracing us especially at the hour of death, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, endowing us with immortal life, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, accompanying us every moment of our life, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, shielding us from the fire of hell, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, in the conversion of hardened sinners, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, astonishment for Angels, incomprehensible to Saints, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, unfathomed in all the mysteries of God, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, lifting us out of every misery, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, source of our happiness and joy, I trust in You. 

Divine Mercy, in calling us forth from nothingness to existence, I trust