 EVE I N GOD. Then on the OUR FATHER beads you will say the following 
words: "Eternal Father, I offer You the Body and Blood, Soul and Divinity of Your 
dearly beloved Son, Our Lord Jesus Christ, in atonement for our sins and those of 
the whole world." On the HAI L MARY beads you will say the following words: "For 
the sake of His sorrowful Passion have mercy on us and on the whole world." I n 
conclusion, three times you will recite these words: "Holy God, Holy Mighty One, 
Holy I mmortal One, have mercy on us and on the whole world." riooi 

477 Silence is a sword in the spiritual struggle. A talkative soul will never attain sanctity. The 
sword of silence will cut off everything that would like to cling to the soul. We are sensitive to 
words and quickly want to answer back, without taking any regard as to whether it is God's 
will that we should speak. A silent soul 14 strong; no adversities will harm it if it perseveres 
in silence. The silent soul is capable of attaining the closest union with God. It lives almost 
always under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. God works in a silent soul without hindrance. 


478 0 my J esus, You know, You alone know well that m heart knows no other love but You! All 
my virginal love is drowned eternally in You, O J esus! I sense keenly ho Your divine Blood is 
circulating in my heart; I have no the least doubt that Your most pure love has entered m 
heart with Your most sacred Blood. I am aware did You are dwelling in me, together with the 
Father and the Holy Spirit, or ratherlam aware that it is I who it living in You, O 
incomprehensible God! I am aware that I am dissolving in You like a drop in an ocean. I am 
aware that You are within me and all about me, that You are in all things that surround me, 
in all that happens to me. O my God, I have come to know You within my heart, and I have 
loved You above all things that exist on earth or in heaven. Our hearts have a mutual 
understanding, and no one of humankind will comprehend this. 

479 My second confession to the Archbishop [J albrzykowski]. "Know, my daughter, that if this is 
the will of God, it will take place sooner or later, for God's will must be done. Love God in 
your heart, have..." ( unfinished thought]. 

480 September 29. The Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel. I have become interiorly united 
with God. His presence penetrates me to my very depths and fills me with peace, joy and 
amazement. After such moments of prayer, I am filled with strength and an extraordinary 
courage to stiffer and struggle. Nothing terrifies me, even if the whole world should turn 
against me. All adversities touch only the surface, but they have no entry to the depths, 
because God, who strengthens me, who fills me, dwells there. All the snares of the enemy 
are crushed at His footstool. During these moments of union, God sustains me with His 
might. His might passes on to me and makes me capable of loving Him. A soul never reaches 
this state by its own efforts. At the beginning of this interior grace, I was filled with fright, 
and I started to give in to it; but very quickly, the Lord let me know how much this 
displeases Him. But it is also He, Himself, who set my fears at rest. 

481 Almost every feast of the Church gives me a deeper knowledge of God and a special grace. 
That is why I prepare myself for each feast and unite myself closely with the spirit of the 
Church. What a joy it is to be a faithful child of the Church! Oh, how much I love Holy Church 
and all those who live in it! I look upon them as living members of Christ, who is their Head. 

I burn with love with those who love; I suffer with those who suffer, I am consumed with 
sorrow at the sight of those whoa are cold and ungrateful; and I then try to have such a love 
for God that it will make amends for those who do not love Him, those who feed their Savior 
with ingratitude at its worst. 

482 O my God, I am conscious of my mission in the Holy Church. It is my constant endeavor to 
plead for me mercy for the world. I unite myself closely with Jesus and stand before Him as 
an atoning sacrifice on behalf of the world. God will refuse me nothing when I entreat Him 
with the voice of His Son. My sacrifice is nothing in itself, but when I join it to the sacrifice of 
Jesus Christ, it becomes all-powerful and has the power to appease divine wrath. God loves

us in His Son; the painful Passion of the Son of God constantly turns aside the wrath of God. 



483 O God, how I desire that souls come to know You and to see that You have created them 
because of Your unfathomable love. 0 my Creator and Lord, I feel that I am going to remove 
the veil of heaven so that earth will not doubt Your goodness. 

Make of me, Jesus, a pure and agreeable offering before the Face of Your Father. Jesus, 
transform me, miserable and sinful as I am, into Your own self (for You can do all things), 
and give me to Your Eternal Father. I want t become a sacrificial host before You, but an 
ordinary wafer to people. I want the fragrance of my sacrifice be known to You alone. 0 
Eternal God, an unquenchable fire of supplication for Your mercy burns within me. I know 
and understand that this is my task here and in eternity. You yourself have told me to speak 
about this great mercy and about Your goodness. 

484 On a certain occasion, I understood how very displeased God is with an act, however 
commendable, that does not bear the stamp of a pure intention. Such deeds incite God to 
punishment rather than to reward. May such deeds be as few as possible in our lives; indeed, 
in religious life, there should be none at all. 

485 I accept joy or suffering, praise or humiliation with the same disposition. I remember that 
one and the other are passing. What does it matter to me what people say about me? I have 
long ago given up everything that concerns my person. My name is host-or sacrifice, not in 
words but in deeds, in the emptying of myself and in becoming like You on the Cross, O good 
J esus, my Master! 

486 Jesus, when You come to me in Holy Communion, You who together with the Father and the 
Holy Spirit have deigned to dwell in the little heaven of my heart, I try to keep You company 
throughout the day, I do not leave You alone for even a moment. Although I am in the 
company of other people or with our wards, my heart is always united to Him. When I am 
asleep I offer Him every beat of my heart; when I awaken I immerse myself in Him without 
saying a word. When I awaken I adore the Holy Trinity for a short while and thank God for 
having deigned to give me yet another day, that the mystery of the incarnation of His Son 
may once more be repeated in me, and that once again His sorrowful Passion may unfold 
before my eyes. I then try to make it easier for J esus to pass through me to other souls. I go 
everywhere with Jesus; His presence accompanies me everywhere. 

487 In the sufferings of soul or body, I try to keep silence, for then my spirit gains the strength 
that flows from the Passion of Jesus. I have ever before my eyes His sorrowful Face, abused 
and disfigured, His divine Heart pierced by our sins and especially by the ingratitude of 
chosen souls. 

488 Twice I was exhorted to make myself ready for sufferings awaiting me in Warsaw. The first 
warning was given interiorly by a voice I heard, and the second took place during Holy Mass. 
Before the elevation, I saw the Lord Jesus on the Cross and He said to me, Prepare 
yourself for sufferings. I thanked the Lord for the grace of this warning and said to Him, "I 
am certainly not going t suffer more than You, my Savior." However, I took this to heart and 
kept strengthening myself through prayer and little sufferings so that I would be able to 
endure when the greater ones come. 

October 19, 1935. 

Trip from Vilnius to Cracow for an Eight-day Retreat 



489 On Friday evening during the rosary, when I was thinking about tomorrow's journey and 
about the importance of the matter which I was to present to Father Andrasz. non fear seized 
me at the sight of my misery and incapability, and of the greatness of God work. Crushed by 
this suffering, I submitted myself to the will of God. At that moment, I saw J esus, in a bright 
garment, near my kneeler. He said, Why are you afraid to do My will? Will I not help 
you as I have done thus far? Repeat every one of My demands to those who 
represent Me on earth, but do only what they tell you to do. At that, a certain strength 
entered my soul. 

490 The next morning, I saw my Guardian Angel, who accompanied me throughout the journey 
as far as Warsaw. He disappeared when we entered the convent gate. J ust as we were 
passing the little chapel on the way to greet the superiors, God's presence took hold of me

and the Lord filled me with the fire of His love. At such moments, I always have a better 
understanding oft greatness of His majesty. 

When we took our seats on the train from Warsaw to Cracow, I once again saw my Guardian 
Angel at my side. He was absorbed in prayer and in contemplating God, and I followed him 
with my thoughts. When arrived at the convent entrance, he disappeared. 

491 When I entered the chapel, once again the majesty of God overwhelmed me. I felt that I was 
immersed in God, totally immersed in Him and penetrated by Him, being aware of how much 
the heavenly Father loves us. Oh, what great happiness fills my heart from knowing God and 
the divine life! It is my desire to share this happiness with all people. I cannot keep this 
happiness locked in my own heart alone, for His flames burn me and cause my bosom and 
my entrails to burst asunder. I desire to go throughout the whole world and speak to souls 
about the great mercy of God. Priests, help me in this; use the strongest words [at your 
disposal] to proclaim His mercy, for every word falls short of how merciful He really is. 

+ 

J.M.J. Cracow, October 20, 1935. 

Eight-day Retreat. 

492 Eternal God, Goodness itself, whose mercy is incomprehensible to every intellect, whether 
human or angelic, help me, your feeble child, to do Your holy will as You make it known to 
me. I desire nothing but to fulfill God's desires. Lord, here are my soul and my body, my 
mind and my will, my heart and all my love. Rule me according to Your eternal plans. 

493 After Holy Communion, my soul was again flooded with God's love. I rejoiced in His 
greatness. Here I see distinctly His will, which I am to carry out, and at the same time my 
own weakness and misery; I see how I can do nothing without His help. 


Second Day of Retreat. 


494 When I was about to go to the parlor to see Father Andrasz, I felt frightened because the 
secret is binding only in the confessional. This was a groundless fear. One word from Mother 
Superior set me at ease about it. Meanwhile, when I entered the chapel, I heard these words 
in my soul: I want you to be open and simple as a child with My representative just 
as you are with Me; otherwise I will leave you and will not commune with you. 

Truly, God gave me the great grace of complete confidence, and after the conversation, God 
granted me the grace of deep peace and light concerning these matters. 

495 Jesus, Eternal Light, enlighten my mind, strengthen my will, inflame my heart and be with 
me as You have promised, for without You I am nothing. You know, J esus, how weak lam. I 
do not need to tell You this, for You yourself know perfectly well how wretched I am. It is in 
You that all my strength lies. 

496 Confession Day. From early morning, the turmoil in my soul was more violent than anything I 
had ever experienced before. Complete abandonment by God; I felt the utter weakness that 

I was. Thoughts bore in upon me: why should I leave this convent where I am loved by the 
sisters and superiors, where life is so tranquil; [where I am] bound by perpetual vows and 
carry out my duties without difficulty; why should I listen to the voice of my conscience; why 
follow an inspiration coming from who knows where; wouldn't it be better to carry on like all 
the other sisters? Perhaps the Lord's words could be stifled, not taken heed of; maybe God 
will not demand an account of them on the day of judgment. Where will this inner voice lead 
me? If I follow it, what tremendous difficulties, tribulations and adversities are in store for 
me. I fear the future, and I am agonizing in the present. 

This suffering continued with the same intensity throughout the whole day. When, in the 
evening, my turn came for confession, I could not make a full confession, even though I had 
been preparing for a long time. I received absolution and left, not knowing what was going 
on within me. When I went to bed, the suffering grew even worse; or rather, it changed into 
a fire which penetrated all the faculties of my soul like lightning, piercing me to the marrow, 
and to the most secret recesses of my heart. In the midst of this suffering, I was unable to 
bring myself to do anything. "Your will be done, Lord." At times I could not even think these 
words. Truly, a deadly fear had taken hold of me, and the flames of hell were touching me. 
Toward morning, silence set in, and my tribulations disappeared in the twinkling of an eye,

but I felt so frightfully exhausted that I could not even move. During my conversation with 
Mother Superior, my strength returned bit by bit, but God alone knows how I felt throughout 
that whole day. 

497 O Eternal Truth, Word Incarnate, who most faithfully fulfilled Your Father's will, today I am 
becoming a martyr of Your inspirations, since I cannot carry them out because I have no will 
of my own, though interiorly I see Your will clearly. I submit in everything to the will of my 
superiors and my confessor. I will follow Your will insofar as You will permit me to do so 
through Your representative. O my Jesus, it cannot be helped, but I give priority to the voice 
of the Church over the voice with which You speak to me. 


After Holy Communion 



498 I saw J esus in the usual way, and He spoke these words to me: Lay your head on my 
shoulder, rest and regain your strength. I am always with you. Tell the friend of My 
Heart that I use such feeble creatures to carry out My work. After a while my spirit 
was strengthened with great power. Tell him that I had let him see your weakness 
during your confession to show him what you are of yourself. 

499 Each battle valiantly fought brings me joy, peace, light, experience and courage for the 
future; honor and glory to God; and in the end, for me, a reward. 

Today is the Feast of Christ the King. 

[October 27, 1935] 

500 During Holy Mass I prayed fervently that J esus might become King of all hearts and that 
divine grace might shine in every soul. Then I saw Jesus as He is depicted in the image, and 
He said to me, My daughter, you give Me the greatest glory by faithfully fulfilling My 
desires. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-521 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

80 1 -850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1 001-1050 t 1051-1 100 t 1101-1150 t 1 151-1200 t 1 201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-1321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1 590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 


Notebook 1 


501 Oh, how great is Your beauty, Jesus my Spouse! Living Flower enclosing life-giving dew for a 
thirsting soul! My soul is drowned in You. You alone are the object of my desires and 
strivings. Unite me as closely as possible to Yourself, to the Father and to the Holy Spirit. Let 
me live and die in You. 

502 Only love has meaning; it raises up our smallest actions into infinity. 

503 My Jesus, truly I would not know how to live without You-my spirit is welded to Yours. No 
one can really understand this; one must first live in You in order to recognize You in others. 

Cracow, October 25, 1935. 

Retreat Resolutions. 

504 Not to do anything without the permission of my confessor and the consent of my superiors 
in all things, but especially regarding these inspirations and demands of the Lord. 

All my free time I will spend with the Divine Guest within my soul; I will safeguard my 
interior and exterior silence so that Jesus can rest in my heart. 

My sweetest repose will be in serving and obliging the sisters, in forgetting about myself and 
thinking of how to please the sisters. 

I will not offer explanations on my own behalf or seek to vindicate myself when criticized; I 
will let others judge me as they will. 

I have only one trusted Friend in whom I confide everything, and that is Jesus-the Eucharist, 
and His . representative- my confessor. 

In the midst of all sufferings, both physical and spiritual, as well as in darkness and 
desolation, I will remain silent, like a dove, and not complain. 

I will empty myself continually at His feet in order to obtain mercy for poor souls. 

J.M.J. Cracow, October 27, 1935. 

Father Andrasz-Spiritual Counsel. 

505 All my nothingness is drowned in the sea of Your mercy. With the confidence of a child, I 
throw myself into Your arms, O Father of Mercy, to make up for the unbelief of so many souls 
who are afraid to trust in You. Oh, how very few souls really know You! How ardently I desire

that the Feast of Mercy be known by souls! Mercy is the crown of Your works; You provide for 
all with the love of a most tender mother. 



506 506 "Do nothing without the consent of the superiors. One must think this matter over 
thoroughly and pray much. One must be very careful about these things because, in your 
present situation, Sister, the will of God is certain and clear, for you are in fact bound to this 
Congregation by vows, and perpetual vows at that; so there should be no doubt. What you 
are experiencing interiorly, Sister, are only the glimmerings of a project. God can make some 
alterations, but such things are very rare. Don't be in a hurry, Sister, until you have received 
more precise knowledge. The works of God proceed slowly, but if they are of Him, you will 
surely recognize them clearly. If they are not, they will disappear; and you, by being 
obedient, will not go astray. Speak frankly about everything to your confessor and obey him 
blindly. 

"For the present, Sister, there is nothing more for you to do than accept the suffering until 
the time when everything will become clear; that is, all things will be resolved. You are well 
disposed as regards these matters, and so continue in this simplicity and spirit of obedience; 
this is a good sign. If you continue in this attitude, God will not allow you to fall into error. 
Still, as much as is possible, keep far away from these things, but if despite that they still 
come your way, receive them calmly and do not fear anything. You are in the good hands of 
a very good God. In all that you have told me, I do not see any illusion or anything contrary 
to faith. These are things which are good in themselves, and it would indeed be good if there 
were a group of souls pleading with God for the world, as we all are in need of prayer. You 
have a good director; stay with him and be at peace. Be faithful to God's will and carry it out. 
As to your duties, always do what you are told to do and as you are told to do it, no matter 
how humiliating or toilsome it might be. Always choose the last place, and then they 
themselves will say to you, ' Go up higher. 1 In spirit and in your demeanor, consider yourself 
the least in the whole house and in the entire Congregation. In everything and at all times, 
be most faithful to God." 

507 I desire, O my J esus, to suffer and burn with the flame of Your love in all the circumstances 
of my life. I am Yours, completely Yours, and I wish to disappear in You, O Jesus, I wish to 
be lost in Your divine beauty. You pursue me with Your love, 0 Lord; You penetrate my soul 
like a ray of the sun and change its darkness into Your light. I feel very vividly that I am 
living in You as one small spark swallowed up by the incomprehensible fire with which You 
burn, 0 inconceivable Trinity! No greater joy is to be found than that of loving God. Already 
here on earth we can taste the happiness of those in heaven by an intimate union with God, 

a union that is extraordinary and often quite incomprehensible to us. One can attain this very 
grace through simple faithfulness of soul. 

508 When a reluctance and a monotony as regards my duties begins to take possession of me, I 
remind myself that I am in the house of the Lord, where nothing is small and where the glory 
of the Church and the progress of many a soul depend on this small deed of mine, 
accomplished in a divinized way. Therefore there is nothing small in a religious congregation. 

509 In the adversities that I experience, I remind myself that the time for doing battle has not 
yet come to an end. I arm myself with patience, and in this way I defeat my assailant. 

510 In no way do I seek perfection inquisitively, but I probe into the spirit of Jesus and fix my 
eyes on His deeds as summarized in the Gospel. Even if I lived a thousand years, I would not 
exhaust what is contained there. 



511 When my intentions are not recognized, but rather condemned, I am not too much surprised, 
for I know that it is only God who scrutinizes my heart. Truth will not die; the wounded heart 
will regain peace in due time, and my spirit is strengthened through adversities. I do not 
always listen to what my heart tells me, but I keep asking God for light; and when I feel I 
have regained my equilibrium, then I say more. 

512 The day of the renewal of vows. The presence of God flooded my soul. During Holy Mass I

saw J esus, and He said to me, You are my great joy; your love and your humility make 
Me leave the heavenly throne and unite myself with you. Love fills up the abyss that 
exists between My greatness and your nothingness. 

513 Love is flooding my soul; I am plunged into an ocean of love. I feel that I am swooning and 
becoming completely lost in Him. 

514 Jesus, make my heart like unto Yours, or rather transform it into Your own Heart that I may 
sense the needs of other hearts, especially those who are sad and suffering. May the rays of 
mercy rest in my heart. 

515 In the evening, when I was walking in the garden saying my rosary and came to the 
cemetery. fio 2 i I opened the gate a little and began to pray for a while, and I asked them 
interiorly, "You are very happy are you not?" Then I heard the words, "We are happy in the 
measure that we have fulfilled God's will"-and then silence as before. I became introspective 
and reflected for a long time on how I am fulfilling God's will and how I am profiting from the 
time that God has given me. 

516 On the evening of that same day, when I had already gone to bed, a certain soul came to 
me, woke me up by tapping on the night table and asked me to pray for her. I wanted to ask 
who she was, but I mortified my curiosity and joined this little mortification to my prayer and 
offered them for her. 

517 Once, when visiting a sick sister no3i who was eighty-four and known for many virtues, I 
asked her, "Sister, you are surely ready to stand before the Lord, are you not?" She 
answered, "I have been preparing myself all my life long for this last hour." And then she 
added, "Old age does not dispense one from the combat." 

518 + Before All Souls' Day, I went to the cemetery at dusk. Although it was locked, I managed 
to open the gate a bit and said, "If you need something, my dear little souls, I will be glad to 
help you to the extent that the rule permits me." I then heard these words, "Do the will of 
God; we are happy in the measure that we have fulfilled God's will." 

519 In the evening, these souls came and asked me to pray for them, and I did pray very much 
for them. In the evening, when the procession was returning from the cemetery, I saw a 
great multitude of souls walking with us into the chapel and praying with us. I prayed a good 
deal, for I had my superiors' permission riQ4i to do so. 


520 During the night, a soul I had already seen before visited me. However, it did not ask for 
prayer, but reproached me, saying that I used to be very haughty and vain... "and now you 
are interceding for others while you yourself still have certain vices." I answered that I 
indeed had been vain and haughty, but that I had confessed this and had done penance for 
my stupidity, and that I trusted in the goodness of my God, and that if I still fell occasionally, 
this was indeliberate and never premeditated, even in the smallest things. Still, the soul 
continued to reproach me, saying, "Why are you unwilling to recognize my greatness? Why 
do you alone not glorify me for my great deeds as all others do?" Then I saw that this was 
Satan under the assumed appearance of this soul and I said, "Glory is due to God alone; 
begone Satan!" And in an instant this soul fell into an abyss, horrible beyond all description. 
And I said to the wretched soul that I would tell the whole Church about this. 

521 On Saturday we left Cracow and returned to Vilnius. On the way we visited Czestochowa. 
When I was praying before the miraculous picture, I felt that ... are pleasing ... [unfinished 
thought]. [End of Notebook I] 


Notebook I: 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-52] 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-132 1 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804- 828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 2 


522 +The mercy of the Lord I will sing forever,

Before all the people will I sing it, 

For it is God's greatest attribute 
And for us an unending miracle. 

You gush forth from the Divine Trinity, 

But from one single womb filled with love. 

The mercy of the Lord will be revealed in the soul 
In all its fullness, when the veil falls. 

From the fountain of Your mercy, 0 Lord, 

Flows all happiness and life, 

And thus, all creatures and the whole of creation 
Sing out in ecstasy a song of mercy. 

The bowels of God's mercy are opened for us 
Through the life of Jesus, stretched on the Cross. 

0 sinner, you must not doubt or despair, 

But trust in mercy, for you also can become holy. 

Two streams in the form of rays 

Have gushed forth from the Heart of Jesus, 

Not for Angels, nor Cherubim, nor Seraphim, 

But for the salvation of sinful man. 

523 O will of God, be my love. My J esus, You know that of myself I would not have written a 
single letter, and if I do write, it is only because of a clear command of holy obedience. 

God and Souls 

S. M. Faustina 

of the Blessed Sacrament riosi 

524 + 0 Jesus, hidden God, 

My heart perceives You 
Though veils hide You; 

You know that I love you. 

+ Vilnius, November 24, 1935. 

J .M.J . + Notebook 
Two Blessed Be God! 


525 O Holy Trinity, in whom is contained the inner life of God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Spirit, eternal joy, inconceivable depth of love, poured out upon all creatures and constituting 
their happiness, honor and glory be to Your holy name forever and ever. Amen. 

When I consider Your greatness and beauty, O my God, I rejoice exceedingly that the Lord I 
serve is so great. With love and joy I carry out His will, and the more I come to know Him, 
the more I desire to love Him. I burn with the desire to love Him ever more and more. 

526 + The 14th. This Thursday, when we were having nocturnal adoration, at first I could not 
pray; a sort of dryness engulfed me. I could not meditate on Jesus' sorrowful Passion. So I 
lay prostrate and offered the most sorrowful Passion of the Lord Jesus to the heavenly Father 
in reparation for the sins of all the world. When I got to my feet after this prayer and walked 
to my kneeler, I suddenly saw J esus next to it. The Lord J esus appeared as He was during 
the scourging. In His hands He was holding a white garment with which He clothed me and a 
cord with which He girded me, and He covered me with a red cloak like the one He was 
clothed with during His Passion and a veil of the same color, and He said to me, This is how 
you and your companions are going to be clothed. My life from birth to death on the 
Cross will be the rule for you. Fix your eyes upon Me and live according to what you 
see. I desire that you penetrate into My spirit more deeply and understand that I 
am meek and humble of heart. 

527 On one occasion, I felt an urge to set to work and fulfill whatever God is demanding of me. I 
entered the chapel for a moment and heard a voice in my soul saying, Why are you afraid? 
Do you think that I will not have enough omnipotence to support you? At that 
moment, my soul felt extraordinary strength, and all the adversities that could befall me in 
carrying out God's will seemed as nothing to me. 

528 On Friday during Mass when my soul was flooded with God's happiness, I heard these words 
in my soul: My mercy has passed into souls through the divine-human Heart of Jesus 
as a ray from the sun passes through crystal. I felt in my heart and understood that 
every approach to God is brought about by Jesus, in Him and through Him. 

529 On the evening of the last day [November 15] of the novena at Ostra Brama, after the 
singing of the litany, one of the priests exposed the Blessed Sacrament in the monstrance. 
When he placed it on the altar, I immediately saw the Infant Jesus, stretching out His little 
arms, first of all toward His Mother, who at that time had taken on a living appearance. When 
the Mother of God was speaking to me, Jesus stretched out His tiny hands toward the 
congregation. The Blessed Mother was telling me to accept all that God asked of me like a 
little child, without questioning; otherwise it would not be pleasing to God. At that moment, 
the I nfant J esus vanished, and the Mother of God was again lifeless, and Her picture was the 
same as it had been before. But my soul was filled with great joy and gladness, and I said to

the Lord, "Do with me as You please; I am ready for everything, but You, O Lord, must not 
abandon me even for a moment." 


+ J. M. J. 



530 To the Glory of the Holy Trinity. 


I asked Mother Superior [Borgia] to permit me to make a forty-day fast, taking once a day a 
piece of bread and a glass of water. However, following the advice of my confessor [Father 
Sopocko], Mother Superior did not agree to forty days, but to seven. "I cannot take you 
away from your duties completely, Sister, because of the other sisters who might notice 
something. I give you my permission to devote yourself to prayer and to note down some of 
these things, but it will be very difficult for me to protect you as regards the fasting. Really, I 
can think of no solution to this," and she said, "Go now, Sister, and perhaps some light will 
come to me." On Sunday morning, I understood that when Mother Superior assigned me as 
portress during mealtime, she was doing so with the thought of giving me the opportunity to 
fast. In the morning, I did not go to breakfast, but, a little while later, I went to Mother 
Superior and asked her whether I had been assigned as portress in view of making it possible 
for me to fast unnoticed. Mother replied, "When I assigned you, rio6i Sister, it was with this 
in mind." I then saw that this was the same thought that I had had interiorly. 

531 November 24, 1935. Sunday, first day. I went at once before the Blessed Sacrament and 
offered myself with Jesus, present in the Most Holy Sacrament, to the Everlasting Father. 
Then I heard these words in my soul: Your purpose and that of your companions is to 
unite yourselves with Me as closely as possible; through love You will reconcile 
earth with heaven, you will soften the just anger of God, and you will plead for 
mercy for the world. I place in your care two pearls very precious to My Heart: 
these are the souls of priests and religious. You will pray particularly for them; 
their power will come from your diminishment. You will join prayers, fasts, 
mortifications, labors and all sufferings to My prayer, fasting, mortification, labors 
and sufferings and then they will have power before My Father. 

532 After Holy Communion, I saw the Lord Jesus, who said these words to me: Today, 
penetrate into the spirit of My poverty and arrange everything in such a way that 
the most destitute will have no reason to envy you. I find pleasure, not in large 
buildings and magnificent structures, but in a pure and humble heart. 

533 When I was by myself, I began to reflect on the spirit of poverty. I clearly saw that Jesus, 
although He is Lord of all things, possessed nothing. From a borrowed manger He went 
through life doing good to all, but himself having no place to lay His head. And on the Cross, 

I see the summit of His poverty, for He does not even have a garment on himself. 0 Jesus, 
through a solemn vow of poverty I desire to become like You; poverty will be my mother. As 
exteriorly we should possess nothing and have nothing to dispose of as our own; so interiorly 
we should desire nothing. And in the Most Blessed Sacrament, how great is Your poverty! 

Has there ever been a soul as abandoned as You were on the Cross, Jesus? 

534 Chastity. There is no need to explain that this vow forbids all those things prohibited by the 
sixth and ninth commandments: deeds, thoughts, words, feelings... I understand that a 
solemn vow differs from a simple vow; I understand this in all its implications. While 
reflecting upon this, I heard these words in my souLYou are My spouse forever; your 
chastity should be greater than that of the Angels, for I call no angel to such 
intimacy as I do you. The smallest act of My spouse is of infinite value. A pure soul 
has inconceivable power before God. 


535 Obedience. I have come to do My Father's will. I obeyed My parents, I obeyed My 
tormentors and now I obey the priests. I understand, 0 Jesus, the spirit of obedience 
and in what it consists. It includes not only external performance, but also the reason, the 
will and judgment. Obeying our superiors, we obey God. It makes no difference whether it is 
an angel or a man who, acting in God's stead, gives me orders; I must always obey. I am not 
going to write much about the vows; they are clear and specific. I will rather put down a few 
general thoughts about this congregation. 

+ General Summary.

536 There will never be any splendid houses, but only a small church with a small community 
consisting of a few souls, not more than ten, plus two externs to look after the external 
affairs of the community and the church. These two sisters will not wear the habit, but 
secular dress; they will take simple vows, and they will depend strictly on the superior who 
will be cloistered. They will share in all the spiritual benefits of the congregation. There must 
never be more than two and, preferably, only one. Each house will be independent of the 
others, although they will be closely united by the rule, the vows and the spirit. In 
exceptional cases, however, a sister from one community may be tranferred to another and 
also, if there is question of founding a new house, some sisters may be transferred, if need 
be, from another house. Each house will depend on the local ordinary. 

537 Each sister will have a separate cell, but life will be communal as regards prayer, meals and 
recreation. Each nun, after her profession, will no longer see the world, even through a grill, 
as this will be covered with a dark cloth, and even the conversations will be strictly limited. 
She will be as if dead, not understood by the world and not understanding the world. She is 
to stand between heaven and earth, begging God constantly for mercy on the world and that 
priests be empowered so that their words be not empty and that they, in their extraordinary 
dignity and so exposed to risks, might keep themselves completely stainless. Though these 
souls will not be numerous, they will be heroic souls. There will be no room for cowardly or 
effeminate souls. 

538 There will be no distinction between the sisters, no mothers. no7i no reverends, no 
venerables, but all will be equal, even though there might be great differences in their 
parentage. We know who Jesus was, and yet how He humbled himself and with whom He 
associated. Their habit will be like that worn by J esus during His Passion, and they will not 
simply wear the robe [He wore]; they must also seal themselves with the marks He bore: 
suffering and scorn. Each one will strive for the greatest self-denial and have a love of 
humility, and she who will distinguish herself most in this latter virtue will be the one who is 
capable of leading the others. 

539 As God has made us sharers in His mercy and even more than that, dispensers of that 
mercy, we should therefore have great love for each soul, beginning with the elect and 
ending with the soul that does not yet know God. By prayer and mortification, we will make 
our way to the most uncivilized countries, paving the way for the missionaries. We will bear 
in mind that a soldier on the front line cannot hold out long without support from the rear 
forces that do not actually take part in the fighting but provide for all his needs; and that 
such is the role of prayer, and that therefore each one of us is to be distinguished by an 
apostolic spirit. 


540 In the evening when I was writing, I heard a voice in my cell which said, "Do not leave this 
Congregation; have mercy upon yourself, such great sufferings are in store for you." When I 
looked in the direction of the voice, I saw nothing, and I continued to write. Suddenly I heard 
a noise and the words: "When you leave, we will destroy you. Do not torture us." I glanced 
around and saw many ugly monsters. So I mentally made the sign of the Cross and they 
disappeared immediately. How terribly ugly Satan is! The poor damned souls that have to 
keep him company! J ust the sight of him is more disgusting than all the torments of hell. 

541 A short time later, I heard this voice in my soul: Do not fear anything; nothing will 
happen to you against My will. After these words of the Lord, a strange power entered my 
soul. I rejoiced greatly that God is so good. 

542 Postulancy. riosi Age of admission: any person between the ages of fifteen and thirty. Firstly, 
the spirit with which the candidate is imbued and her character are to be taken into 
consideration, whether she has a strong will and the courage to follow in Jesus' footsteps 
with joy and gladness, as God loves a cheerful giver. She must despise the world and herself. 
The lack of a dowry will never be an obstacle to admission. All formalities concerning the 
candidate must be clear; no complicated cases should be admitted.

Melancholy persons, those disposed to sadness, those suffering from contagious diseases, 
those of an unstable character and those who are inclined to be suspicious of others are not 
adaptable to the religious life and must not be admitted. Members should be selected with 
greatest care, as one ill-fitting member is enough to throw the whole convent into confusion. 

543 The duration of the postulancy. The postulancy will last one year. During this time, the 
candidate should examine whether she is attracted to this type of life and whether it is 
suitable to her. The directress should also diligently consider whether or not the person in 
question is suitable for this type of life. After a year, if the postulant shows evidence of a 
stable will and an earnest desire to serve God, she should be admitted to the novitiate. 

544 The novitiate riQ9i is to last one year, without any interruption. At this time the novice should 
be taught about the virtues relating to the vows and about the importance of the vows. The 
directress should do her utmost to provide a solid formation. Let her train the novices in the 
practice of humility, because only a humble heart keeps the vows easily and experiences the 
great joys that God pours out upon the faithful soul. The novices should not be burdened 
with duties that entail responsibilities, so that they may be free to devote themselves to their 
own perfection. They are obliged to observe the rules and statutes strictly, as are the 
postulants. 

545 After a year of novitiate, if the novice proves faithful, she may be admitted to make her 
profession for one year. This is to be repeated for three years. She may then be given duties 
of responsibility. However, she will still belong to the novitiate, and once a week she must 
attend conferences together with the novices, and she will spend the last six months entirely 
in the novitiate in order to prepare well for her solemn profession, moi 


546 Meals. We will have no meat. Our meals shall be such that not even the poor will have any 
reason to envy us. Still, feast days may differ slightly from regular days. The sisters will eat 
three times a day. Fasts, especially the two great ones, will be observed strictly, according to 
the original spirit. The food should be the same for all the nuns without exception so that 
communal life may be kept pure. This refers not only to food but to clothing and the 
furnishing of cells as well. However, if a sister should fall ill, she should receive every 
consideration. 

547 Prayers. One hour of meditation, Holy Mass and Holy Communion, prayers, two examinations 
of conscience, office. mil rosary, spiritual reading, one hour of prayer during the night. As to 
the horarium, it is better to draw it up after we have begun to live this type of life. 

548 Suddenly I heard these words in my soul: My daughter, I assure you of a permanent 
income on which you will live. Your duty will be to trust completely in My goodness, 
and My duty will be to give you all you need. I am making Myself dependent upon 
your trust: if your trust is great, then My generosity will be without limit. 

549 Work. As poor persons, the nuns themselves will do all the work in the convent. Each one 
should be glad when she is given some work which is humbling or which goes against her 
nature, as that will greatly help her interior formation. The superior will often change the 
sisters' duties, and in this way help them to detach themselves completely from the little 
details to which women have a great attachment. Truly, I often find it amusing to see with 
my own eyes souls who have forsaken really great things only to attach themselves to fiddle 
faddle; that is, trifles. Each sister, including even the superior, shall work in the kitchen for a 
month. Every one should take a turn at every chore which is to be done in the convent. 

550 And always and in everything, their intention should be pure, for every sort of mixed motive 
is displeasing to God. They should accuse themselves of all external transgressions, and ask 
the superior for a penance. They should do this in a spirit of humility. 

They should love one another with a sublime love, with a pure love, seeing God's likeness in 
every sister. Love should be the special characteristic of this little community, so they must 
not close up their hearts, but embrace the whole world, rendering mercy to every soul

through prayer, according to their calling. If we live in this spirit of mercy, we ourselves will 
obtain mercy. 

551 How great should each one's love for the Church be! As a good child prays for the mother it 
loves, so also should every Christian soul pray for the Church, its Mother. What then should 
be said of us religious who have especially committed ourselves to praying for the Church? 
How great, then, is our apostolate, hidden though it be. All our little daily nothings will be 
placed at the feet of the Lord J esus as a propitiatory offering for the world; but in order that 
our offering may be pleasing to God, it must be pure. And for it to be pure, the heart must 
be freed of all natural attachments, and all its affections must be directed towards the 
Creator, loving all creatures in Him and according to His will; and, acting thus, each with a 
zealous spirit will bring joy to the Church. 


552 In addition to the vows, I see one rule as most important. Although all the rules are 
important, I put this one in first place, and it is silence. Truly, if this rule were to be observed 
strictly, I would not worry about the others. Women are very fond of talking, but the Holy 
Spirit does not speak to a soul that is distracted and garrulous. He speaks by His quiet 
inspirations to a soul that is recollected, to a soul that knows how to keep silence. If silence 
were strictly observed, there would not be any grumbling, bitterness, slandering, or gossip, 
and charity would not be tarnished. In a word, many wrongs would not be done. Silent lips 
are pure gold and bear witness to holiness within. 

553 But I want to speak immediately of a second rule; that is, speech. Keeping silent when one 
ought to speak is an imperfection and sometimes even a sin. And so, let all the sisters take 
part in recreation, and the superior should not dispense them from this except for a matter of 
great importance. Recreation is an opportunity for getting to know one another. Let each 
sister speak her mind in all simplicity for the edification of the others and not in a spirit of 
superiority nor, God forbid, in a quarrelsome manner, for that would not be in keeping with 
perfection and the spirit of our vocation, which should be especially characterized by love. 
Twice a day, there will be a recreation of one half hour. But if a sister breaks silence outside 
that time, she must accuse herself before the superior at once and ask for a penance, and 
the superior should punish these offenses with public penances, or else she will answer for 
this before the Lord. 

554 Enclosure, mu No one may enter the enclosure without the special permission of the 
Ordinary and under very special circumstances, such as the administration of the Sacraments 
to the ill in order to prepare them for death, and for the burial rites. There also may be need 
of letting in a workman to do some repairs, but for this a specific permission will be required. 
The door to the enclosure will always be locked and only the superior will have the key. 

555 The use of the parlor. None of the sisters will make use of the parlor without special 
permission of the superior, and the superior should not permit frequent visits. Those who 
have died to the world should not be going back to it, not even through conversations. But if 
the superior thinks it right to permit some sister to go to the parlor, let her observe the 
following directions. She herself should accompany the sister, and if she cannot do so, she 
should arrange to be replaced by a sister who will be bound to confidence and must not 
repeat what she has heard, but who is to inform the superior of everything. Conversations 
ought to be short, unless there is permission for extra time for the sake of the person who 
has come for the visit. However, the curtain is not to be drawn aside, except for very special 
cases, as for example when a mother or father urgently asks that this be done. 

556 Letters. Every sister may write sealed letters to the Ordinary to whom the house is subject. 
For any other letter, permission is required, and the sister shall hand the letter unsealed to 
the superior. The superior is to be guided by the spirit of love and prudence, and has the 
right to send or withhold the letter, in the light of whatever is for the greater glory of God. 
However, I would like very much that such communications be as rare as possible. Let us

help people by prayer and mortification, and not by correspondence. 


557 Confession. Both the regular and the extraordinary confessors for the community will be 
appointed by the Ordinary [Bishop]. rii3i T here will be one regular confessor, and he will hear 
the sisters' confessions once a week. The extraordinary confessor will come once every three 
months, and each sister is obliged to see him, even if she makes no confession. The two 
confessors will hold their posts in the convent for three years. Then there will be a secret 
vote, and the superior will submit the results to the Ordinary. The confessor can be re- 
appointed for an additional three years and even a third three-year term. The sisters will 
make their confession through a locked grille. The conferences to the community will also be 
given through a grille, covered with a dark curtain. The sisters will never talk among 
themselves about confession or the confessors; rather, let them pray for them that God may 
give them the light to direct their souls. 

558 Holy Communion. The sisters should never talk about who goes more and who goes less 
frequently to Holy Communion. They should refrain from passing judgment on this subject 
which does not concern them. All judgments in this matter belong exclusively to the 
confessor. The superior may speak to a sister, not to inquire why she is not going to 
Communion, but simply to make confession available to her. The superiors should never dare 
to enter into the domain of the sisters' consciences. The superior may sometimes arrange 
that the community offer Communion for a certain intention. Each sister should strive for the 
greatest purity of soul, so that she might receive the Divine Visitor every day. 

559 On one occasion, when I entered the chapel, I saw the walls of a building in a state of 
disrepair [a torn down building], r ii4i The windows were without panes, and the doors had 
only frames with no paneling. Then I heard these words in my soul: This is where the 
convent will be. I was a little disappointed that these ruins were to be the convent. 

560 Thursday. I felt urged to undertake as soon as possible the task which the Lord was asking of 
me. While making my confession, I was holding to my own opinion over that of the 
confessor. At first, I did not realize this, but when I was making my Holy Hour I saw the Lord 
Jesus as He appears in the Image, and He told me that I must repeat to my confessor and 
my superiors everything He says to me or asks of me... and do only what you receive 
permission to do. And He gave me to know how displeased He was with persons who are 
self-willed, and I recognized that I was one of these. I saw this shadow of self-will in myself, 
and I threw myself in the dust nisi before His Majesty and, with a broken heart, begged His 
pardon. But J esus did not let me remain in this state for long. His divine gaze filled my heart 
with such joy that I have no words to express it. And Jesus gave me to know that I should 
ask Him more questions and seek His advice. Truly, how sweet is the look of my Lord; His 
eyes penetrate my soul to its most secret depths. My spirit communicates with God without 
any word being spoken. I am aware that He is living in me and I in Him. 

561 All at once, I saw the image in some small chapel and at that moment I saw that the chapel 
became an enormous and beautiful temple. And in this temple I saw the Mother of God with 
the Infant in Her arms. And a moment later, the Infant Jesus disappeared from the arms of 
His Mother, and I saw the living image of Jesus Crucified. The Mother of God told me to do 
what She had done, that, even when joyful, I should always keep my eyes fixed on the cross, 
and She told me that the graces God was granting me were not for me alone, but for other 
souls as well. 


562 When I see the I nfant J esus during Holy Mass, it is not always the same: