 because it is then that 
you speak more eloquently. 

1165 Know this. My daughter: if you strive for perfection you will sanctify many souls; 
and if you do not strive for sanctity, by the same token, many souls will remain 
imperfect. Know that their perfection will depend on your perfection, and the 
greater part of the responsibility for these souls will fall on you. 

1166 Then He said to me, Do not fear, My child; but remain faithful only to My grace... 

1167 Satan has admitted to me that I am the object of his hatred. He said that "a thousand souls 
do me less harm than you do when you speak of the great mercy of the Almighty One. The 
greatest sinners regain confidence and return to God, and I lose everything. But what is 
more, you persecute me personally with that unfathomable mercy of the Almighty One." I 
took note of the great hatred Satan has for the Mercy of God. He does not want to 
acknowledge that God is good. 

1168 June 29, 1937. During breakfast today, Father Andrasz greeted the whole community by 
telephone. He is already back [from Rome], and this very afternoon he came to see us. The 
professed sisters, the novices, and both groups of students assembled in the quadrangle 
[the girls' playground in front of the building] and waited for our dear Father. The children 
welcomed him with songs and poems, and then we asked him to tell us about Rome and the 
many beautiful things he had seen there. He spoke for over two hours and, because of this, 
there was no time left to talk in private. 

1169 Today, my soul entered into close union with the Lord. He made known to me how I should 
always abandon myself to His holy will: I n one moment, I can give you more than you 
are able to desire. 

1170 June 30, 1937. Today, the Lord said to me, I have wanted to exalt this Congregation 
many times, but I am unable to do so because of its pride. Know, My daughter, 
that I do not grant My graces to proud souls, and I even take away from them the 
graces I have granted. 



1171 Today Sister J olanta r 1991 asked me to make an agreement with her: she will pray for me, 
and I am to pray for the girls in her class in Vilnius. As for me, I always pray for our work, 
but I have resolved to pray for the class in Vilnius for two months, and Sister J olanta will 
say three Hail Marys to the Incarnate Word every day for the intention that I might profit 
from God's grace. Our friendship has deepened. 

1172 July 1, 1937. The month of July. 

Today during the Angelus, the Lord gave me an understanding of God's incomprehensible 
love for people. He lifts us up to His very Godhead. His only motives are love and 
fathomless mercy. Though You make known the mystery to us through an angel, You 
yourself carry it out. 

1173 In spite of the profound peace my soul is enjoying, I am struggling continuously, and it is 
often a hard-fought battle for me to walk faithfully along my path; that is, the path which 
the Lord J esus wants me to follow. And my path is to be faithful to the will of God in all 
things and at all times, especially by being faithful to inner inspirations in order to be a 
receptive instrument in God's hands for the carrying out of the work of His fathomless 
mercy. 

1174 J uly 4, 1937. First Sunday of the month. 

Monthly retreat. 

This evening, I prepared with great care and prayed long to the Holy Spirit that He might

deign to grant me His light and take me under His special guidance; [I prayed] also to Our 
Lady, to my Guardian Angel, and to our patron saints. [2001 

1175 Fruit of the meditation. 

Whatever J esus did, He did well. He went along, doing good. His manner was full of 
goodness and mercy. His steps were guided by compassion. Toward His enemies He showed 
goodness, kindness, and understanding, and to those in need help and consolation. 

I have resolved to mirror faithfully these traits of J esus in myself during this month, even if 
this costs me much. 

1176 During Adoration, I heard a voice in my soul: These efforts of yours. My daughter, are 
pleasing to Me; they are the delight of My Heart. I see every movement of your 
heart with which you worship Me. 

1177 Particular examen. 

Continuation of the same: to unite myself with the merciful Christ. For the sake of His 
sorrowful Passion, I will entreat the heavenly Father for the whole world. A point of the rule: 
strict observance of silence. 

I must probe the depth of my being and thank God for everything, uniting myself with 
Jesus. With Him, in Him, and through Him, I give glory to God. 


1178 O Lord, my Love, I thank You for this day on which You have allowed me to draw a wealth 
of graces from the fountain of Your unfathomable mercy. O J esus, not only today, but at 
every moment, I draw from Your unfathomable mercy everything that the soul and body 
could want. 

1179 J uly 7, 1937. I n times of doubt; that is, when the soul is weak, let it ask J esus himself to 
act. Although it knows that it should act by the grace of God, nevertheless, at certain times, 
it is better for it to leave all action to God. 

1180 June [July] 15, 1937. Once, I learned that I was to be transferred to another house. My 
knowledge of this was purely interior. At the same time, I heard a voice in my soul: Do not 

be afraid. My daughter; it is My will that you should remain here. Human plans will 
be thwarted, since they must conform to My will. 

1181 When I was close to the Lord, He said to me, Why are you afraid to begin the work 
which I have commanded you to carry out? I answered, "Why do You leave me on my 
own at such times, Jesus, and why do I not feel Your presence?" My daughter, even 
though you do not perceive Me in the most secret depths of your heart, you still 
cannot say that I am not there. I only remove from you the awareness of My 
presence, and that should not be an obstacle to the carrying out of My will. I do 
this to achieve My unfathomable ends, which you will know of later on. 

My daughter, know without doubt, and once and for all, that only mortal sin drives 
Me out of a soul, and nothing else. 

1182 + Today the Lord said to me, My daughter. My pleasure and delight, nothing will stop 
Me from granting you graces. Your misery does not hinder My mercy. My daughter, 
write that the greater the misery of a soul, the greater its right to My mercy; 

[urge] all souls to trust in the unfathomable abyss of My mercy, because I want to 
save them all. On the cross, the fountain of My mercy was opened wide by the 
lance for all souls-no one have I excluded! 

1183 0 J esus, I want to live in the present moment, to live as if this were the last day of my life. 

I want to use every moment scrupulously for the greater glory of God, to use every 
circumstance for the benefit of my soul. I want to look upon everything, from the point of 
view that nothing happens without the will of God. 

God of unfathomable mercy, embrace the whole world and pour Yourself out upon us 
through the merciful Heart of Jesus. 



1184 On an earlier occasion. 


In the evening, I saw the Lord Jesus upon the cross. From His hands, feet and side, the 
Most Sacred Blood was flowing. After some time, Jesus said to me, All this is for the 

salvation of souls. Consider well. My daughter, what you are doing for their 
salvation. I answered, "Jesus, when I look at Your suffering, I see that I am doing next to 
nothing for the salvation of souls." And the Lord said to me, Know, My daughter, that 
your silent day-to-day martyrdom in complete submission to My will ushers many 
souls into heaven. And when it seems to you that your suffering exceeds your 
strength, contemplate My wounds, and you will rise above human scorn and 
judgment. Meditation on My Passion will help you rise above all things. I 
understood many things I had been unable to comprehend before.

1185 J uly 9, 1937. This evening, one of the deceased sisters came and asked me for one day of 
fasting and to offer all my [spiritual] exercises on that day for her. I answered that I would. 

1186 From early morning on the following day, I offered everything for her intention. During Holy 
Mass, I had a brief experience of her torment. I experienced such intense hunger for God 
that I seemed to be dying of the desire to become united with Him. This lasted only a short 
time, but I understood what the longing of the souls in purgatory was like. 

1187 Immediately after Holy Mass, I asked Mother Superior's permission to fast, but I did not 
receive it because of my illness. When I entered the chapel, I heard these words: "If you 
had fasted, Sister, I would not have gotten relief until the evening, but for the sake of your 
obedience, which prevented you from fasting, I obtained this relief at once. Obedience has 
great power." After these words I heard: "May God reward you." 

1188 I often pray for Poland, but I see that God is very angry with it because of its ingratitude. 
[2oii I exert all the strength of my soul to defend it. I constantly remind God of the promises 
of His mercy. When I see His anger, I throw myself trustingly into the abyss of His mercy, 
and I plunge all Poland in it, and then He cannot use His justice. My country, how much you 
cost me! There is no day in which I do not pray for you. 

1189 (A sentence from Saint Vincent de Paul: "The Lord always sets His hand to a task when He 
removes all human means and orders us to do a thing that exceeds our strength.") 

1190 + Jesus. -From all My wounds, like from streams, mercy flows for souls, but the 
wound in My Heart is the fountain of unfathomable mercy. From this fountain 
spring all graces for souls. The flames of compassion burn Me. I desire greatly to 
pour them out upon souls. Speak to the whole world about My mercy. 

1191 As long as we live, the love of God grows in us. Until we die, we ought to strive for the love 
of God. I have learned and experienced that souls living in love are distinguished in this: 
that they are greatly enlightened concerning the things of God, both in their own souls and 
in the souls of others. And simple souls, without an education, are outstanding for their 
knowledge. 


1192 At the fourteenth station. I get the strange feeling that J esus is going into the ground. 

When my soul is in anguish, I think only in this way: Jesus is good and full of mercy, and 
even if the ground were to give way under my feet, I would not cease to trust in Him. 

1193 Today, I have heard these words: My daughter, delight of My Heart, it is with pleasure 
that I look into your soul. I bestow many graces only because of you. I also 
withhold My punishments only because of you. You restrain Me, and I cannot 
vindicate the claims of My justice. You bind My hands with your love. 

1194 J uly 13, 1937. Today, J esus has given me light as to how I should behave toward one of the 
sisters, who had asked me about many spiritual matters concerning which she had doubts. 
But basically this was not the question; she only wanted to find out my opinion in these 
matters in order to have something to say about me to the other sisters. Oh, if at least she 
had repeated the same words that I had spoken to her without distortions and additions! 
Jesus put me on my guard in respect to her. I resolved to pray for her, because only prayer 
can enlighten that soul. 

1195 0 my J esus, nothing can lower my ideals; that is, the love which I have for You. Although 
the path is very thorny, I do not fear to go ahead. Even if a hailstorm of persecutions covers 
me; even if my friends forsake me, even if all things conspire against me, and the horizon 
grows dark; even if a raging storm breaks out, and I feel I am quite alone and must brave it 
all; still, fully at peace, I will trust in Your mercy, 0 my God, and my hope will not be 
disappointed. 

1196 Today, when a certain sister who was on duty approached me in the refectory [the sisters' 
dining room, where assigned sisters serve at the time of common meals], I experienced 
severe suffering in the places of the Wounds. I was given to know the state of her soul. I 
prayed much for her. 

1197 Sudden calming of a storm. There was a terrible storm last night. I bowed my face low to 
the ground and started to say the Litany of the Saints. Towards the end of the Litany, such

drowsiness came over me that Icould in no way finish the prayer. Then I got up and said to 
the Lord, "Jesus, calm the storm, for Your child is unable to pray any longer, and I am 
heavy with sleep." After these words, I threw the window wide open, not even securing it 
with hooks. Sister N. [probably Sister Fabiola Pawluk] then said to me, "Sister, what are 
you doing! The wind will surely tear the window loose!" I told her to sleep in peace, and at 
once the storm completely subsided. The next day, the sisters talked ' about the sudden 
calming of the storm, not knowing what this meant. I said nothing, but I merely thought 1 
within myself: Jesus and little Faustina know what it means... 

1198 The 20th [of J uly, 1937]. I learned today that I am to go to Rabka. [2021 I was not to leave 
until August 5, but I asked Mother Superior [Irene] to let me go at once. I have not seen 
Father Andrasz at all, and I asked her to let me leave as soon as possible. Mother Superior 
was a little surprised that I wanted to leave so soon, but I did not explain the reason for my 
wanting to do so. That will remain a secret forever. In these circumstances, I have made 
one resolution which I am going to keep. 


1199 [J uly] 29. I am to leave for Rabka today. I went into the chapel and asked the Lord J esus 
for a safe journey. But within my soul there was silence and darkness. I felt I was all alone 
and had no one [to turn to]. I asked Jesus to be with me. Then I felt a tiny ray of light in 
my soul as a sign that J esus was with me but, after this grace, the darkness and shadows in 
my soul increased. Then I said, "Your will be done, for everything is possible to You." When 

I was on the train and gazed through the window at the beautiful countryside and the 
mountains, the torments of my soul grew even greater. As the sisters welcomed me and 
began to surround me with their warmth, my sufferings redoubled. 

1200 I would have like to hide and rest for a while in solitude, in a word, to be alone. At such 
moments, no creature is capable of giving me comfort, and even if I had wanted to say 
something about myself, I would have experienced new anguish. Therefore, I have kept 
silent at such moments and submitted myself, in silence, to the will of God-and that has 
given me relief. I demand nothing from creatures and communicate with them only in so far 
as is necessary. I will not take them into my confidence unless this is for the greater glory 
of God. My communing is with the angels [cf. Mt. 18: 10; Ex. 23: 20]. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-52] 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801 -850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-132 : 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401- 1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804- 1828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 3 


1201 I feel so unwell here, however, that I am obliged to stay in bed. I feel strange sharp pains 
all through my chest; I cannot even move my hand. One night, I had to lie quite 
motionless, as it seemed to me that if I budged, everything in my lungs would tear. The 
night was endless. I united myself to J esus Crucified, and I implored the heavenly Father on 
behalf of sinners. It is said that maladies of the lungs do not cause such sharp pains, but I 
suffer these sharp pains constantly. My health has deteriorated so much here that I must 
remain in bed, and Sister N. [probably Sister Helen noil] says I will not improve, because 
the climate of Rabka is not good for every sick person. 

1202 I could not even go to Holy Mass or receive Holy Communion today but, amidst the 
sufferings of body and soul, I kept on repeating, "May the Lord's will be done. I know that 
Your bounty is without limit." Then 1 heard an angel who sang out my whole life history and 
everything it comprised. I was surprised, but also strengthened. 

1203 Saint J oseph urged me to have a constant devotion to him. He himself told me to recite

three prayers [the Our Father, Hail Mary, and Glory be] and the Memorare [204i once every 
day. He looked at me with great kindness and gave me to know how much he is supporting 
this work [of mercy]. He has promised me this special help and protection. I recite the 
requested prayers every day and feel his special protection. 

August 1, 1937. One-day retreat. 

1204 A retreat of suffering. 0 J esus, in these days of suffering, I am not capable of any kind of 
prayer. The oppression of my body and soul has increased. O my Jesus, You do see that 
Your child is on the decline. I am not forcing myself further, but simply submitting my will 
to the will of J esus. 0 J esus, You are always J esus to me. 

1205 When I went to confession, I did not even know how to confess. However, the priest 
[probably Father Casimir Ratkiewicz 12051 ] recognized the condition of my soul at once and 
said to me, "Despite everything, you are on the way to salvation; you are on the right path, 
but God may leave your soul in this darkness and obscurity until death, and the former light 
may never return. But in all things abandon yourself to the will of God." 

1206 Today, I started a novena to Our Lady of the Assumption for three intentions: first, that I 
may see the Reverend Dr. Sopocko; second, that God would hasten this work; and third, for 
the intention of my country. 

1207 August 10. Today I am returning to Cracow, in the company of one of the sisters. My soul is 
shrouded in suffering. I am continually uniting myself to Him by an act of the will. He is my 
power and strength. 


1208 May You be blessed, 0 God, for everything You send me. Nothing under the sun happens 
without Your will. I cannot penetrate Your secrets with regard to myself, but I press my lips 
to the chalice You offer me. 

1209 Jesus, I trust in You. 

Novena to The Divine Mercy [ 206 i 

which Jesus instructed me to write down and make before the Feast of Mercy. It begins on 
Good Friday. 

I desire that during these nine days you bring souls to 1 the fount of My mercy, 
that they may draw therefrom strength and refreshment and whatever graces 
they need in the hardships of life and, especially, at the hour of death. 

On each day you will bring to My Heart a different group of souls, and you will 
immerse them in this ocean of My mercy, and I will bring all these souls into the 
house of My Father. You will do this in this life and in the next. I will deny nothing 
to any soul whom you will bring to the fount of My mercy. On each day you will 
beg My Father, on the strength of My bitter Passion, for graces for these souls. 

I answered, "Jesus, I do not know how to make this novena or which souls to bring first into 
Your Most Compassionate Heart." Jesus replied that He would tell me which souls to bring 
each day into His Heart. 

First Day 

1210 Today, bring to Me all mankind, especially all sinners, and immerse them in the 
ocean of My mercy. I n this way you will console Me in the bitter grief into which 
the loss of souls plunges Me. 

1211 Most Merciful Jesus, whose very nature it is to have 1 compassion on us and to forgive us, 
do not look upon our sins, but upon the trust which we place in Your infinite goodness. 
Receive us all into the abode of Your Most Compassionate Heart, and never let us escape 
from It. We beg this of You by Your love which unites You to the Father and the Holy Spirit. 

Oh omnipotence of Divine Mercy, 

Salvation of sinful people, 

You are a sea of mercy and compassion; 

You aid those who entreat You with humility. 

Eternal Father, turn Your merciful gaze upon all mankind and especially upon poor sinners, 
all enfolded in the Most Compassionate Heart of Jesus. For the sake of His sorrowful 
Passion, show us Your mercy, that we may praise the omnipotence of Your mercy forever 
and ever. Amen. 

Second Day 

1212 Today bring to Me the souls of priests and religious, and immerse them in My 
unfathomable mercy. It was they who gave Me the strength to endure My bitter 
Passion. Through them, as through channels. My mercy flows out upon mankind. 


1213 Most Merciful J esus, from whom comes all that is good, increase Your grace in us, that we 
may perform worthy works of mercy, and that all who see us may glorify the Father of 
Mercy who is in heaven. 

The fountain of God's love 
Dwells in pure hearts, 

Bathed in the Sea of Mercy, 

Radiant as stars, bright as the dawn.

Eternal Father, turn Your merciful gaze upon the company [of chosen ones] in Your 
vineyard-upon the souls of priests and religious; and endow them with the strength of Your 
blessing. For the love of the Heart of Your Son, in which they are enfolded, impart to them 
Your power and light, that they may be able to guide others in the way of salvation, and 
with one voice sing praise to Your boundless mercy for ages without end. Amen. 

Third Day 

1214 Today bring to Me all devout and faithful souls, and immerse them in the ocean of 
My mercy. These souls brought Me consolation on the Way of the Cross. They were 
that drop of consolation in the midst of an ocean of bitterness. 

1215 Most Merciful J esus, from the treasury of Your mercy, You impart Your graces in great 
abundance to each and all. Receive us into the abode of Your Most Compassionate Heart 
and never let us escape from It. We beg this of You by that most wondrous love for the 
heavenly Father with which Your Heart burns so fiercely. 

The miracles of mercy are impenetrable. 

Neither the sinner nor just one will fathom them. 

When You cast upon us an eye of pity, 

You draw us all closer to Your love. 

Eternal Father, turn Your merciful gaze upon faithful souls, as upon the inheritance of Your 
Son. For the sake of His sorrowful Passion, grant them Your blessing and surround them 
with Your constant protection. Thus may they never fail in love or lose the treasure of the 
holy faith, but rather, with all the hosts of Angels and Saints, may they glorify Your 
boundless mercy for endless ages. Amen. 

Fourth Day 

1216 Today bring to Me the pagans and those who do not yet know me. I was thinking 
also of them during My bitter Passion, and their future zeal comforted My Heart. 

I mmerse them in the ocean of My mercy. 



1217 Most Compassionate J esus, You are the Light of the whole world. Receive into the abode of 
Your Most Compassionate Heart the souls of pagans who as yet do not know You. Let the 
rays of Your grace enlighten them that they, too, together with us, may extol Your 
wonderful mercy; and do not let them escape from the abode which is Your Most 
Compassionate Heart. 

May the light of Your love 
Enlighten the souls in darkness; 

Grant that these souls will know You 
And, together with us, praise Your mercy. 

Eternal Father, turn Your merciful gaze upon the souls of pagans and of those who as yet do 
not know You, but who are enclosed in the Most Compassionate Heart of Jesus. Draw them 
to the light of the Gospel. These souls do not know what great happiness it is to love You. 
Grant that they, too, may extol the generosity of Your 1 mercy for endless ages. Amen. 

Fifth Day 

1218 Today bring to Me the souls of heretics and schismatics, and immerse them in the 
ocean of My mercy. During My bitter Passion they tore at My Body and Heart; that 
is. My Church. As they return to unity with the Church, My wounds heal, and in this 
way they alleviate My Passion. 

1219 Most Merciful J esus, Goodness Itself, You do not refuse light to those who seek it of You. 
Receive into the abode of Your Most Compassionate Heart the souls of heretics and 
schismatics. Draw them by Your light into the unity of the Church, and do not let them 
escape from the abode of Your Most Compassionate Heart; but bring it about that they, too, 
come to adore the generosity of Your mercy. 

Even for those who have torn the garment of Your unity, 

A fount of mercy flows from Your Heart. 

The omnipotence of Your mercy, Oh God. 

Can lead these souls also out of error. 

Eternal Father, turn Your merciful gaze upon the souls of heretics and schismatics, who 
have squandered Your blessings and misused Your graces by obstinately persisting in their 
errors. Do not look upon their errors, but upon the love of Your own Son and upon His bitter 
Passion, which He underwent for their sake, since they, too, are enclosed in the Most 
Compassionate Heart of J esus. Bring it about that they also may glorify Your great mercy 
for endless ages. Amen. 

Sixth Day 

1220 Today bring to Me the meek and humble souls and the souls of little children, and 
immerse them in My mercy. These souls most closely resemble My Heart. They 
strengthened Me during My bitter agony. I saw them as earthly Angels, who would 
keep vigil at My altars. I pour out upon them whole torrents of grace. Only the 
humble soul is able to receive My grace. I favor humble souls with My confidence.

1221 Most Merciful Jesus, You Yourself have said, "Learn from Me for I am meek and humble of 
heart." Receive into the abode of Your Most Compassionate Heart all meek and humble 
souls and the souls of little children. These souls send all heaven into ecstasy, and they are 
the heavenly Father's favorites. They are a sweet-smelling bouquet before the throne of 
God; God himself takes delight in their fragrance. These souls have a permanent abode in 
Your Most Compassionate Heart, O Jesus, and they unceasingly sing out a hymn of love and 
mercy. 

1222 A truly gentle and humble soul 

Already here on earth the air of paradise breathes, 

And in the fragrance of her humble heart 
The Creator Himself delights. 

1223 Eternal Father, turn Your merciful gaze upon meek and humble souls, and upon the souls of 
little children, who are enfolded in the abode which is the Most Compassionate Heart of 
Jesus. These souls bear the closest resemblance to Your Son. Their fragrance rises from the 
earth and reaches Your very throne. Father of mercy and of all goodness, I beg You by the 
love You bear these souls and by the delight You take in them: bless the whole world, that 
all souls together may sing out the praises of Your mercy for endless ages. Amen. 

Seventh Day 

1224 Today bring to Me the souls who especially venerate and glorify My mercy, and 
immerse them in My mercy. These souls sorrowed most over My Passion and 
entered most deeply into My Spirit. They are living images of My Compassionate 
Heart. These souls will shine with a special brightness in the next life. Not one of 
them will go into the fire of hell. I shall particularly defend each one of them at 
the hour of death. 

1225 Most Merciful Jesus, whose Heart is Love Itself, receive into the abode of Your Most 
Compassionate Heart the souls of those who particularly extol and venerate the greatness 
of Your mercy. These souls are mighty with the very power of God Himself. I n the midst of 
all afflictions and adversities they go forward, confident of Your mercy. These souls are 
united to J esus and carry all mankind on their shoulders. These souls will not be judged 
severely, but Your mercy will embrace them as they depart from this life. 

A soul who praises the goodness of her Lord 
Is especially loved by Him. 

She is always close to the living fountain 
And draws graces from Mercy Divine. 

Eternal Father, turn Your merciful gaze upon the souls who glorify and venerate Your 
greatest attribute, that of Your fathomless mercy, and who are enclosed in the Most 
Compassionate Heart of Jesus. These souls are a living Gospel; their hands are full of deeds 
of mercy, and their spirit, overflowing with joy, sings a canticle of mercy to You, 0 Most 
High! I beg You O God: Show them Your mercy according to the hope and trust they have 
placed in You. Let there be accomplished in them the promise of Jesus, who said to them, I 
Myself will defend as My own glory, during their lifetime, and especially at the 
hour of their death, those souls who will venerate My fathomless mercy. 


Eighth Day 



1226 Today bring to Me the souls who are in the prison of Purgatory, and immerse them 
in the abyss of My mercy. Let the torrents of My Blood cool down their scorching 
flames. All these souls are greatly loved by Me. They are making retribution to My 
justice. It is in your power to bring them relief. Draw all the indulgences from the 
treasury of My Church and offer them on their behalf. Oh, if you only knew the 
torments they suffer, you would continually offer for them the alms of the spirit 
and pay off their debt to My justice. 

1227 Most Merciful Jesus, You Yourself have said that You desire mercy; so I bring into the abode 
of Your Most Compassionate Heart the souls in Purgatory, souls who are very dear to You, 
and yet, who must make retribution to Your justice. May the streams of Blood and Water 
which gushed forth from Your Heart put out the flames of the purifying fire, that in that 
place, too, the power of Your mercy may be praised. 

From the terrible heat of the cleansing fire 
Rises a plaint to Your mercy, 

And they receive comfort, refreshment, relief 
In the stream of mingled Blood and Water. 

Eternal Father, turn Your merciful gaze upon the souls suffering in Purgatory, who are 
enfolded in the Most Compassionate Heart of Jesus. I beg You, by the sorrowful Passion of

Jesus Your Son, and by all the bitterness with which His most sacred Soul was flooded, 
manifest Your mercy to the souls who are under Your just scrutiny. Look upon them in no 
other way than through the Wounds of Jesus, Your dearly beloved Son; for we firmly 
believe that there is no limit to Your goodness and compassion. 

Ninth Day 

1228 Today bring to Me souls who have become lukewarm, and immerse them in the 
abyss of My mercy. These souls wound My Heart most painfully. My soul suffered 
the most dreadful loathing in the Garden of Olives because of lukewarm souls. 
They were the reason I cried out: "Father, take this cup away from Me, if it be 
Your will." For them, the last hope of salvation is to flee to My mercy. 

1229 Most Compassionate J esus, You are Compassion Itself. I bring lukewarm souls into the 
abode of Your Most Compassionate Heart. I n this fire of Your pure love let these tepid souls, 
who, like corpses, filled You with such deep loathing, be once again set aflame. O Most 
Compassionate J esus, exercise the omnipotence of Your mercy and draw them into the very 
ardor of Your love; and bestow upon them the gift of holy love, for nothing is beyond Your 
power. 

Fire and ice cannot be joined; 

Either the fire dies, or the ice melts. 

But by Your mercy, O God, 

You can make up for all that is lacking. 

Eternal Father, turn Your merciful gaze upon lukewarm souls, who are nonetheless enfolded 
in the Most Compassionate Heart of Jesus. Father of Mercy, I beg You by the bitter Passion 
of Your Son and by His three-hour agony on the Cross: Let them, too, glorify the abyss of 
Your mercy.... 



1230 O day of eternity, 0 day so long desired, 

With thirst and longing, my eyes search you out. 

Soon love will tear the veil asunder, 

And you will be my salvation. 

0 day most beautiful, moment incomparable, 

When for the first time I shall see my God, 

The Bridegroom of my soul and Lord of lords, 

And fear will not restrain my soul. 

0 day most solemn, 0 day of brightness, 

When the soul will know God in His omnipotence 
And drown totally in His love, 

Knowing the miseries of exile are o'er. 

0 happy day, 0 blessed day, 

When my heart will burn for You with fire eternal, 

For even now I feel Your presence, though through the veil. 
Through life and death, 0 Jesus, You are my rapture and delight. 

O day, of which I dreamed through all my life, 

Waiting long for You, 0 God, 

For it is You alone whom I desire. 

You are the one and only of my heart; all else is naught. 

0 day of delight, day of eternal bliss, 

God of great majesty, my beloved Spouse, 

You know that nothing will satisfy a virgin heart. 

On Your tender Heart I rest my brow. 

[End of Notebook Three] 


Notebook I: 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-521 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801 -850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101- 1 150 t 1151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231- 132: 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 - 1450 t 145 1 -1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 


Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 


To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 4 


1231 + J.M.J. 

Today J esus came to live in my heart, 

He descended from His throne on high, 

The great Lord, the Creator of all things; 

And He came to me in the form of bread. 

O Eternal God, in my bosom enclosed, 

Possessing You, I possess all Heaven, 

And with the Angels I sing to You: 

Holy, I live for Your glory alone. 

Not with a Seraph, do You unite yourself, 0 God, 

But with a wretched man 
Who can do nothing without You; 

But to him You are ever merciful. 

My heart is Your abode, 

O King of Eternal Glory; 

Rule in my heart and be Lord, 

As in a palace of splendor untold. 

0 great, incomprehensible God, 

Who have deigned to abase Yourself so, 

Humbly I adore You 

And beg You in Your goodness to save me. 

+ J. M. J. 

1232 O sweet Mother of God, 

1 model my life on You; 

You are for me the bright dawn; 

In You I lose myself, enraptured. 

O Mother, Immaculate Virgin,

In You the divine ray is reflected, 

Midst storms, 'tis You who teach me to love the Lord, 
O my shield and defense from the foe. 


Cracow, August 10, 1937. 



1233 Sr. Mary Faustina of the Blessed Sacrament 

0 Sacred Host, fountain of divine sweetness, 

You give strength to my soul; 

0 You are the Omnipotent One, who took flesh of the Virgin, 

You come to my heart, in secret, 

Beyond reach of the groping senses. 

+ J. M. J. 

Cracow, August 10, 1937 
Notebook Four 

1234 All for You, J esus. I desire to adore Your mercy with every beat of my heart and, to the 
extent that I am able, to encourage souls to trust in that mercy, as You yourself have 
commanded me, O Lord. 

1235 In my heart, in my soul, there is a dark night. My spirit has come up against an 
impenetrable wall that hides God from me. But this darkness is not of my doing. Strange 
indeed is this torture of which I fear to write in full. But even in this state, I am trying to be 
faithful to You, O my J esus. Always and in all things, my heart beats for You alone. 

1236 August 10, 1937. I came back today from Rabka to Cracow. I feel very ill. Only J esus knows 
how much I am suffering. During these days, I have very much resembled J esus Crucified. I 
have armed myself with patience in order to explain to each sister why I was not able to 
stay there; that is, because my health had become worse, even though I knew very well 
that certain sisters would inquire, not out of sympathy for my sufferings, but in order to add 
to them. 

1237 O Jesus, what darkness is enveloping me and what nothingness is penetrating me. But, my 
Jesus, do not leave me alone; grant me the grace of faithfulness. Although I cannot 
penetrate the mystery of God's visitation, it is in my power to say: Your will be done. 

1238 August 12. On passing through Cracow, Rev. Father Sopocko paid me a short visit today. I 
had wanted to see him, and God fulfilled my desire. This priest is a great soul, entirely filled 
with God. My joy was very great, and I thanked God for this great grace, because it was for 
the greater glory of God that I wanted to see him. 

1239 O living Host, 0 hidden Jesus. You see the condition of my soul. Of myself, I am unable to 
utter Your Holy Name. I cannot bring forth from my heart the fire of love but, kneeling at 
Your feet, I cast upon the Tabernacle the gaze of my soul, a gaze of faithfulness. As for You, 
You are ever the same, while within my soul a change takes place. I trust that the time will 
come when You will unveil Your countenance, and Your child will again see Your sweet face. 

1 am astonished, J esus, that You can hide yourself from me for so long and that You can 
restrain the enormous love You have for me. In the dwelling of my heart, I am listening and 
waiting for Your coming, O only Treasure of my heart! 



1240 The Lord Jesus greatly protects His representatives on earth. How closely He is united with 
them; and He orders me to give priority to their opinion over His. I have come to know the 
great intimacy which exists between Jesus and the priest. Jesus defends whatever the priest 
says, and often complies with his wishes, and sometimes makes His own relationship with a 
soul depend on the priest's advice. 0 Jesus, through a special grace, I have come to know 
very clearly to what extent You have shared Your power and mystery with them, more so 
than with the Angels. I rejoice in this, for it is all for my good. 

1241 + 0 my J esus, when someone is unkind and unpleasant toward us, it is difficult enough to 
bear this kind of suffering. But this is very little in comparison to a suffering which I cannot 
bear; namely, that which I experience when someone exhibits kindness towards me and 
then lays snares at my feet at every step I take. What great will power is necessary to love 
such a soul for God's sake. Many a time one has to be heroic in loving such a soul as God 
demands. If contact with that person were infrequent, it would be easier to endure, but 
when one lives in close contact with the person and experiences this at each step, this 
demands a very great effort. 

1242 My J esus, penetrate me through and through so that I might be able to reflect You in my 
whole life. Divinize me so that my deeds may have supernatural value. Grant that I may 
have love, compassion and mercy for every soul without exception. 0 my Jesus, each of

Your saints reflects one of Your virtues; I desire to reflect Your compassionate heart, full of 
mercy; I want to glorify it. Let Your mercy, 0 Jesus, be impressed upon my heart and soul 
like a seal, and this will be my badge in this and the future life. Glorifying Your mercy is the 
exclusive task of my life. 

August 15, 1937. Father Andrasz's instructions. 

1243 "These times of dryness and stark awareness of one's wretchedness, which God has 
permitted, allow the soul to know how little it can do by itself. They will teach you how 
much you should appreciate God's graces. Secondly, faithfulness in all exercises and duties, 
faithfulness in everything, just as in times of joy. Thirdly, as regards the matters in 
question, be absolutely obedient to the Archbishop [J albrzykowski] although, from time to 
time, the matter can be brought to his attention, but peacefully. Sometimes, a little bitter 
truth is necessary." 

At the end of the conversation, I asked the priest to allow me to commune with J esus as I 
had done formerly. He answered, "I cannot give orders to the Lord J esus, but if He himself 
draws you to himself you may follow the attraction. However, always remember to show 
Him great reverence, for the Lord is great indeed. If you are truly seeking God's will in all 
this and desire to fulfill it, you can be at peace; the Lord will not allow any sort of error. As 
to the mortifications and sufferings, you will give me an account next time of how you carry 
them out. Place yourself in the hands of the Most Holy Mother." 



1244 August 15, 1937. During meditation, God's presence pervaded me keenly, and I was aware 
of the Virgin Mary's joy at the moment of Her Assumption. Towards the end of the 
ceremony carried out in honor of the Mother of God, I saw the Virgin Mary, and She said to 
me, Oh, how very pleased I am with the homage of your love! And at that moment She 
covered all the sisters of our Congregation with Her mantle. With Her right hand, She 
clasped Mother General Michael to herself, and with Her left hand She did so to me, while 
all the sisters were at Her feet, covered with Her mantle. Then the Mother of God said, 
Everyone who perseveres zealously till death in My Congregation will be spared the fire of 
purgatory, and I desire that each one distinguish herself by the following virtues: humility 
and meekness; chastity and love of God and neighbor; compassion and mercy. After these 
words, the whole Congregation disappeared from my sight, and I remained alone with the 
Most Holy Mother who instructed me about the will of God and how to apply it to my life, 
submitting completely to His most holy decrees. It is impossible for one to please God 
without obeying His holy will. My daughter, I strongly recommend that you faithfully fulfill 
all God's wishes, for that is most pleasing in His holy eyes. I very much desire that you 
distinguish yourself in this faithfulness in accomplishing God's will. Put the will of God before 
all sacrifices and holocausts. While the heavenly Mother was talking to me, a deep 
understanding of this will of God was entering my soul. 

1245 My Jesus, delight of my heart, when my soul is filled with Your divinity, I accept sweetness 
and bitterness with the same equanimity. One and the other will pass away. All that I keep 
in my soul is the love of God. For this I strive; all else is secondary. 

1246 16 [August 1937]. After Holy Communion, I saw the Lord Jesus in all His majesty, and He 
said to me, My daughter, during the weeks when you neither saw Me nor felt My 
presence, I was more profoundly united to you than at times [when you 
experienced] ecstasy. And the faithfulness and fragrance of your prayer have 
reached Me. After these words, my soul became flooded with God's consolation. I did not 
see Jesus, and there was only one word I could utter and that was: "Jesus." And after 
pronouncing that Name, my soul was again filled with light and deeper recollection, which 
lasted uninterruptedly for three days. However, outwardly I could still carry out my usual 
duties. 

My whole being was stirred to its most secret depths. God's greatness does not frighten me, 
but makes me happy. By giving Him glory, I myself am lifted up. On seeing His happiness, I 
myself am made happy, because all that is in Him flows back upon me. 

1247 I came to know of the condition of a certain soul and of what in that soul is displeasing to

God. I learn it in the following way: I immediately feel pain in my hands, my feet and my 
side, in those places where the hands, feet and side of the Savior were pierced. At that 
same time, I receive knowledge of the soul's condition and of the nature of the sin 
committed. 



1248 I experience a desire to make reparation to the Lord Jesus in a way which corresponds [to 
the offense]. Today I wore a chain belt for seven hours in order to obtain the grace of 
repentance for that soul. In the seventh hour I felt relief as the soul experienced interiorly 
the remission of its sin, although it had not yet gone to confession. For sins of the flesh, I 
mortify the body and fast to the degree that I am permitted. For sins of pride, I pray with 
my forehead touching the floor. For sins of hatred, I pray and do some good deed for a 
person whom I find difficult. And thus I make amends according to the nature of the sin of 
which I am aware. 

1249 19 [August 1937]. Today during adoration, the Lord gave me to know how much He desires 
a soul to distinguish itself by deeds of love. And in spirit I saw how many souls are calling 
out to us, "Give us God." And the blood of the Apostles boiled up within me. I will not be 
stingy with it; I will shed it all to the last drop for immortal souls. Although perhaps God will 
not demand that in the physical sense, in spirit it is possible and no less meritorious. 

1250 Today I realized that I was not to ask for a certain permission, but that I was to respond to 
this matter as the Mother of God would have me do. For the present, no explanations are 
necessary; peace has returned to me. I received this inspiration just as I was on my way to 
make my examination of conscience, and I was very worried because I did not know how to 
go about it. Divine light can do more in one moment than I, fatiguing myself for several 
days. 

1251 August 22. This morning Saint Barbara, Virgin, visited me and recommended that I offer 
Holy Communion for nine days on behalf of my country and thus appease. God's anger. This 
virgin was wearing a crown made of stars and was holding a sword in her hand. The 
brilliance of the crown was the same as that of the sword. With her white dress and her 
flowing hair, she was so beautiful that if I had not already known the Virgin Mary I would 
have thought that it was She. Now I understand that each virgin has a special beauty all her 
own; a distinct beauty radiates from each of them. 

1252 + August 25, 1937. Today Reverend Father Sopocko arrived and will stay with us until the 
30th. I was extremely glad, because only God knows how ardently I wished to see him for 
the sake of the Work God is doing through him, and this, even though the visit had some 
unpleasant aspects to it as well. 

1253 + While he was celebrating Mass, I saw during the elevation the Crucified Lord Jesus, who 
was disengaging His right arm from the cross, and the light which was coming from the 
Wound was touching his arm. This happened in the course of three Masses, and I 
understood that God would give him strength to carry out this work despite difficulties and 
opposition. This soul, who is pleasing to God, is being crucified by numerous sufferings, but 
I am not at all surprised, for this is how God treats those He especially loves. 

1254 + Today, the 29th, I received permission [ 207 i to have a longer conversation with Rev. Dr. 
Sopocko. I learned that, although there are difficulties, the work is moving ahead, and that 
the Feast of Mercy is already far advanced. It will not be long now before it becomes a 
reality, but much prayer is still needed to bring an end to certain difficulties. 


1255 "As concerns yourself, Sister, it is good that you are remaining in a state of holy 
indifference in everything that pertains to the will of God, and that you are better 
maintaining a state of equilibrium. Please do your best to keep this equanimity. Now, as 
regards all these matters, you are to depend exclusively on Father Andrasz; I am in 
complete agreement with him. Do nothing on your own, Sister, but in all matters take 
counsel from your spiritual director. I beg you to keep your levelheadedness and as great a 
calm as possible. One more thing-l am having printed the chaplet which is to be on the back 
of the image, as well as the invocations that resemble a litany; these too will be placed on

the back. Another large image has also been printed, and with it a few pages which contain 
the Novena to The Divine Mercy. [2081 Pray, Sister, that this be approved." 

1256 [August] 30. Reverend Father Sopocko left this morning. When I was steeped in a prayer of 
thanksgiving for the great grace that I had received from God; namely, that of seeing 
Father, I became united in a special way with the Lord who said to me, He is a priest after 
My own Heart; his efforts are pleasing to Me. You see. My daughter, that My will 
must be done and that which I had promised you, I shall do. Through him I spread 
comfort to suffering and careworn souls. Through him it pleased Me to proclaim 
the worship of My mercy. And through this work of mercy more souls will come 
close to Me than otherwise would have, even if he had kept giving absolution day 
and night for the rest of his life, because by so doing, he would have labored only 
for as long as he lived; whereas, thanks to this work of mercy, he will be laboring 
till the end of the world. 

1257 I had undertaken to make a novena for the intention of seeing him, but I did not even finish 
it before God granted me that grace. 

1258 0 my J esus, how poorly I took advantage of this grace, but that did not depend on me, 
though from another point of view, it did so very much. 

1259 + During this conversation, I came to know his anguished soul. This crucified soul 
resembles the Savior. Where he expects, with good reason, to find consolation, he finds the 
cross. He lives among many friends, but has no one but Jesus. This is how God strips the 
soul He especially loves. 

1260 Today I heard these words: My daughter, be always like a little child towards those 
who represent Me, otherwise you will not benefit from the graces I bestow on you 
through them. 

1261 September 1, 1937. I saw the Lord J esus, like a king in great majesty, looking down upon 
our earth with great severity; but because of His Mother's intercession He prolonged the 
time of His mercy. 

1262 September 3. First Friday of the month. During Holy Mass, I became united with God. Jesus 
gave me to know that even the smallest thing does not happen on earth without His will. 
After having seen this, my soul entered into an unusual repose; I found myself completely 
at peace as to the work in its full extent. God can deal with me as He pleases, and I will 
bless Him for everything. 


1263 Up to now, I have been wondering, with some fear, where these inspirations would lead me. 
My fear increased when the Lord made known to me that I was to leave this Congregation. 
This is the third year passing by since that time, and my soul has felt, in turns, enthusiasm 
and an urge to act-and then I have a lot of courage and strength-and then again, when the 
decisive moment to undertake the work draws near, I feel deserted by God, and because of 
this an extraordinary fear pervades my soul, and I see that it is not the hour intended by 
God to initiate the work. These are sufferings about which I don't even know how to write. 
God alone knows what I put up with, day and night. It seems to me that the worst torments 
of the martyrs would be easier for me to bear than what I am going through, though 
without the shedding of a drop of blood. But all this is for souls, for souls, Lord.... 

1264 Act of total abandonment to the will of God, which is for me, love and mercy itself. 

Act of Oblation 

Jesus- Host, whom I have this very moment received into my heart, through this union with 
You I offer myself to the heavenly Father as a sacrificial host, abandoning myself totally and 
completely to the most merciful and holy will of my God. From today onward, Your will, 

Lord, is my food. Take my whole being; dispose of me as You please. Whatever Your 
fatherly hand gives me, I will accept with submission, peace and joy. I fear nothing, no 
matter in what direction You lead me; helped by Your grace I will carry out everything You 
demand of me. I no longer fear any of Your inspirations nor do I probe anxiously to see 
where they will lead me. Lead me, 0 God, along whatever roads You please; I have placed 
all my trust in Your will which is, for me, love and mercy itself. 

Bid me to stay in this convent, I will stay; bid me to undertake the work, I will undertake it; 
leave me in uncertainty about the work until I die, be blessed; give me death when,

humanly speaking, my life seems particularly necessary, be blessed. Should You take me