 for 
Your words." It displeases Me that, because the sisters were murmuring, you did 
not ask to have Father Andrasz hear your confession in your cell. Know that, 
because of this, you gave them even greater cause for murmuring. Very humbly I 
begged the Lord's forgiveness. 0 my Master, rebuke me; do not overlook my faults, and do 
not let me err. 


1461 + O my J esus, when I am misunderstood and my soul is in anguish, I want to stay a while 
alone with You. The words of mortals give me no comfort. Do not send me, 0 Lord, such 
messengers as speak only for themselves and say what their own nature dictates to them. 
Such consolers make me very tired. 

1462 J anuary 6, 1938. Today, when the chaplain [Father Theodore] brought the Lord J esus, a 
light issued from the Host, its light striking my heart and filling me with a great fire of love. 
Jesus was letting me know that I should answer the inspirations of grace with more 
faithfulness, and that my vigilance should be more subtle. 

1463 + The Lord also gave me to know that many bishops were considering the question of this 
Feast, as well as a certain lay person. Some were enthusiastic about this work of God, while 
others regarded it with disbelief; but in spite of everything, the result was great glory for 
the work of God. Mother I rene and Mother Mary J oseph were giving some kind of a report to 
these dignitaries, but they were being questioned, not so much about the work, as about 
myself.227 As regards the work itself, there was no doubt, since the glory of God was 
already being proclaimed. 

1464 I feel much better today. I was glad I would be able to meditate more during the Holy Hour. 
Then I heard a voice: You will not be in good health. Do not put off the Sacrament of 
Penance, because this displeases Me. Pay little attention to the murmurs of those 
around you. This surprised me, because I am feeling better today, but I gave it no more 
thought. When the sister switched off the light, I began the Holy Hour. But after a while 
something went wrong with my heart. I suffered in silence until eleven o'clock, but then I 
began to feel so bad that I woke up Sister N. [probably Sister Fabiola], who is my 
roommate, and she gave me some drops, which brought me a little relief so that I could lie 
down. I now understand the Lord's warning. I decided to call any priest at all, the next day, 
and to open the secrets of my soul to him. But that was not all, for while I was praying for 
sinners and offering all my sufferings for them, the Evil Spirit could not stand that. 

1465 Taking the form of an apparition he said," Do not pray for sinners, but for yourself, for you 
will be damned." Paying no attention to Satan, I continued to pray with redoubled fervor for

sinners. The Evil Spirit howled with fury, "Oh, if I had power over you!" and disappeared. I 
saw that my suffering and prayer shackled Satan and snatched many souls from his 
clutches. 

1466 J esus, lover of human salvation, draw all souls to the divine life. May the greatness of Your 
mercy be praised here on earth and in eternity. 0 great lover of souls, who in Your 
boundless compassion opened the salutary fountains of mercy so that weak souls may be 
fortified in this life's pilgrimage, Your mercy runs through our life like a golden thread and 
maintains in good order the contact of our being with God. For He does not need anything 
to make Him happy; so everything is solely the work of His mercy. My senses are transfixed 
with joy when God grants me a deeper awareness of that great attribute of His; namely, His 
unfathomable mercy. 

1467 J anuary 7, 1938. First Friday of the month. This morning during Mass, for a brief while, I 
saw the suffering Savior. What struck me was that Jesus was so peaceful amidst His great 
sufferings. I understood that this was a lesson for me on what my outward behavior should 
be in the midst of my various sufferings. 


1468 For quite a long while, I felt pain in my hands, feet and side. Then I saw a certain sinner 
who, profiting from my sufferings, drew near to the Lord. All this for starving souls that they 
may not die of starvation. 

1469 + I went to confession to the chaplain [ Father Theodore] today. J esus comforted me 
through this priest. O my Mother, Church of God, you are a true Mother who understands 
her children... 

1470 Oh, how good it is that Jesus will judge us according to our conscience and not according to 
people's talk and judgments. 0 inconceivable goodness, I see You full of goodness in the 
very act of judgment. 

1471 Although I am feeling weak, and my nature is clamoring for rest, I feel the inspiration of 
grace telling me to take hold of myself and write, write for the comfort of souls, whom I 
love so much and with whom I will share all eternity. And I desire eternal life for them so 
ardently that that is why I use all my free moments, no matter how short, for writing in the 
way that J esus wishes of me. 

1472 January 8. During Holy Mass, I had a moment of knowledge concerning Father S., that 
great glory is being given to God through our mutual efforts. And even though we are far 
from each other, we are often together, because we are united by a common goal. 

1473 O my J esus, my only desire, although I wanted to receive You today with greater fervor 
than ever, nevertheless, precisely on this day, my soul is drier than ever. My faith grows in 
power, and so the fruit of Your coming, Lord, will be abundant. Although many a time You 
come without touching my senses and reign only in the loftier part of me, the senses too 
sometimes rejoice at Your coming. 

1474 I often ask the Lord Jesus for an intellect enlightened by faith. I express this to the Lord in 
these words: "Jesus, give me an intellect, a great intellect, for this only, that I may 
understand You better; because the better I get to know You, the more ardently will I love 
You. Jesus, I ask You for a powerful intellect, that I may understand divine and lofty 
matters. Jesus, give me a keen intellect with which I will get to know Your Divine Essence 
and Your indwelling, Triune life. Give my intellect these capacities and aptitudes by means 
of Your special grace. Although I know that there is a capability through grace which the 
Church gives me, there is still a treasure of graces which You give us, O Lord, when we ask 
You for them. But if my request is not pleasing to You, then I beg You, do not give me the 
inclination to pray thus." 

1475 I strive for the greatest perfection possible in order to be useful to the Church. Greater by 
far is my bond to the Church. The sanctity or the fall of each individual soul has an effect 
upon the whole Church. Observing myself and those who are close to me, I have come to 
understand how great an influence I have on other souls, not by any heroic deeds, as these 
are striking in themselves, but by small actions like a movement of the hand, a look, and 
many other things too numerous to mention, which have an effect on and reflect in the 
souls of others, as I myself have noticed. 



1476 Oh, how good it is that our rule demands strict silence in the dormitory [common

bedrooms] and does not allow us to stay in them unless it is absolutely necessary. I have at 
present a little room in which two of us sleep, but at the time of my sickness when I had to 
stay in bed, I found out how bothersome it was if someone was sitting in the bedroom all 
the time. Sister N. 228 had some handwork to do and sat in the bedroom almost all of the 
time, and another S. 229 would come to instruct her on how to do it. It's difficult to describe 
how much this tires one, especially when one is ill and has spent a night in pain. Every word 
has a repercussion somewhere in the brain, especially when the eyes are heavy with sleep. 

0 rule, how much love there is in you... 

1477 When, during Vespers, the Magnificat was being sung and they came to the words, "He has 
shown the strength of His arm," a profound spirit of recollection enveloped my soul, and I 
understood that the Lord would soon accomplish His work in my soul . ^30 I am not surprised 
now that the Lord did not disclose everything to me at first. 

1478 + Why are You sad today, J esus? Tell me, who is the cause of Your sadness? And J esus 
answered me, Chosen souls who do not have My spirit, who live according to the 
letter [cf. 2 Cor. 3:6] and have placed the letter above My spirit, above the spirit of 
love. 

1 have founded My whole law on love, and yet I do not see love, even in religious 
orders. This is why sadness fills My Heart. 

+ J.M.J. 

1479 O my Jesus, in terrible bitterness and pain, 

I yet feel the caress of Your Divine Heart. 

Like a good mother, You press me to Your bosom, 

And even now You give me to experience what the veil hides. 

0 my Jesus, in this wilderness and terror which surround me, 

My heart still feels the warmth of Your gaze, 

Which no storm can blot out from me, 

As You give me the assurance of Your great love, 0 God. 

0 my J esus, midst the great miseries of this life, 

You shine like a star, 0 Jesus, protecting me from shipwreck. 

And though my miseries be great, 

1 have great trust in the power of Your mercy. 

0 hidden J esus, in the many struggles of my last hour, 

May the omnipotence of Your grace be poured out upon my soul, 

That at death's moment I may gaze upon You 
And see You face to face, as do the chosen in heaven. 

0 my J esus, midst the dangers which surround me, 

1 go through life with a cry of joy, my head raised proudly, 

Because against Your Heart so filled with love, 0 J esus, 

All enemies will be crushed, all darkness dispelled. 


1480 + Jesus, hide me in Your mercy and shield me against everything that might terrify my 
soul. Do not let my trust in Your mercy be disappointed. Shield me with the omnipotence of 
Your mercy, and judge me leniently as well. 

1481 Today 231 during Holy Mass, I saw the I nfant J esus near my kneeler. He appeared to be 
about one year old, and He asked me to take Him in my arms. When I did take Him in my 
arms, He cuddled up close to my bosom and said, It is good for Me to be close to your 
heart. "Although You are so little, I know that You are God. Why do You take the 
appearance of such a little baby to commune with me?" Because I want to teach you 
spiritual childhood. I want you to be very little, because when you are little, I 
carry you close to My Heart, just as you are holding Me close to your heart right 
now. And with that, I was again alone, but no one can conceive the emotions of my soul, I 
was so fully plunged in God, like a sponge thrown into the sea... 

1482 + 0 my J esus, You know that I have gotten myself into a lot of trouble for speaking out the 
truth. 0 truth, so often oppressed, you nearly always wear a crown of thorns! 0 Eternal 
Truth, support me that I may have the courage to speak the truth even if it would come 
about that I would pay for it with my life. 0 J esus, how hard it is to believe in this, when 
one sees one thing taught and something else lived. 

1483 This is why, during the retreat, after a long observation of life, I resolved to fix my eyes 
firmly on You, Jesus, the most perfect of models. 0 eternity, which will uncover many 
secrets and make manifest the truth... 

1484 0 Living Host, support me in this exile, that I may be empowered to walk faithfully in the 
footsteps of the Savior. I do not ask, Lord, that You take me down from the cross, but I 
implore You to give me the strength to remain steadfast upon it. I want to be stretched out

upon the cross as You were, Jesus. I want all the tortures and pains that You suffered. I 
want to drink the cup of bitterness to the dregs. 

The Goodness of God. 

1485 The mercy of God, hidden in the Blessed Sacrament, the voice of the Lord who speaks to us 
from the throne of mercy: Come to Me, all of you. 

Conversation of the Merciful God 
with a Sinful Soul. 

Jesus: Be not afraid of your Savior, O sinful soul. I make the first move to come to 
you, for I know that by yourself you are unable to lift yourself to me. Child, do not 
run away from your Father; be willing to talk openly with your God of mercy who 
wants to speak words of pardon and lavish his graces on you. How dear your soul 
is to Me! I have inscribed your name upon My hand; you are engraved as a deep 
wound in My Heart. 

Soul: Lord, I hear your voice calling me to turn back from the path of sin, but I have neither 
the strength nor the courage to do so. 

Jesus: I am your strength, I will help you in the struggle. 

Soul: Lord, I recognize your holiness, and I fear You. 


Jesus: My child, do you fear the God of mercy? My holiness does not prevent Me 
from being merciful. Behold, for you I have established a throne of mercy on earth- 
the tabernacle-and from this throne I desire to enter into your heart. I am not 
surrounded by a retinue or guards. You can come to me at any moment, at any 
time; I want to speak to you and desire to grant you grace. 

Soul: Lord, I doubt that You will pardon my numerous sins; my misery fills me with fright. 

J esus: My mercy is greater than your sins and those of the entire world. Who can 
measure the extent of my goodness? For you I descended from heaven to earth; 
for you I allowed myself to be nailed to the cross; for you I let my Sacred Heart be 
pierced with a lance, thus opening wide the source of mercy for you. Come, then, 
with trust to draw graces from this fountain. I never reject a contrite heart. Your 
misery has disappeared in the depths of My mercy. Do not argue with Me about 
your wretchedness. You will give me pleasure if you hand over to me all your 
troubles and griefs. I shall heap upon you the treasures of My grace. 

Soul: You have conquered, 0 Lord, my stony heart with Your goodness. In trust and 
humility I approach the tribunal of Your mercy, where You yourself absolve me by the hand 
of your representative. 0 Lord, I feel Your grace and Your peace filling my poor soul. I feel 
overwhelmed by Your mercy, 0 Lord. You forgive me, which is more than I dared to hope 
for or could imagine. Your goodness surpasses all my desires. And now, filled with gratitude 
for so many graces, I invite You to my heart. I wandered, like a prodigal child gone astray; 
but you did not cease to be my Father. Increase Your mercy toward me, for You see how 
weak I am. 

Jesus: Child, speak no more of your misery; it is already forgotten. Listen, My child, 
to what I desire to tell you. Come close to My wounds and draw from the Fountain 
of Life whatever your heart desires. Drink copiously from the Fountain of Life and 
you will not weary on your journey. Look at the splendors of My mercy and do not 
fear the enemies of your salvation. Glorify My mercy. 

Conversation of the Merciful God with a Despairing Soul. 

1486 Jesus: O soul steeped in darkness, do not despair. All is not yet lost. Come and 
confide in your God, who is love and mercy. 

-But the soul, deaf even to this appeal, wraps itself in darkness. 

Jesus calls out again: My child, listen to the voice of your merciful Father. 

-In the soul arises this reply: "For me there is no mercy," and it falls into greater darkness, 
a despair which is a foretaste of hell and makes it unable to draw near to God. 

Jesus calls to the soul a third time, but the soul remains deaf and blind, hardened and 
despairing. Then the mercy of God begins to exert itself, and, without any co-operation 
from the soul, God grants it final grace. If this too is spurned, God will leave the soul in this 
self-chosen disposition for eternity. This grace emerges from the merciful Heart of Jesus 
and gives the soul a special light by means of which the soul begins to understand God's 
effort; but conversion depends on its own will. The soul knows that this, for her, is final 
grace and, should it show even a flicker of good will, the mercy of God will accomplish the 
rest. 



My omnipotent mercy is active here. Happy the soul that takes advantage of this 
grace.

Jesus: What joy fills My Heart when you return to me. Because you are weak, I 
take you in My arms and carry you to the home of My Father. 

Soul (as if awaking, asks fearfully): Is it possible that there yet is mercy for me? 

Jesus: There is. My child. You have a special claim on My mercy. Let it act in your 
poor soul; let the rays of grace enter your soul; they bring with them light, 
warmth, and life. 

Soul: But fear fills me at the thought of my sins, and this terrible fear moves me to doubt 
Your goodness. 

Jesus: My child, all your sins have not wounded My Heart as painfully as your 
present lack of trust doesthat after so many efforts of My love and mercy, you 
should still doubt My goodness. 

Soul: 0 Lord, save me yourself, for I perish. Be my Savior. 0 Lord, I am unable to say 
anything more; my pitiful heart is torn asunder; but You, 0 Lord... Jesus does not let the 
soul finish but, raising it from the ground, from the depths of its misery, he leads it into the 
recesses of His Heart where all its sins disappear instantly, consumed by the flames of love. 

Jesus: Here, soul, are all the treasures of My Heart. Take everything you need from 
it. 

Soul: 0 Lord, I am inundated with Your grace. I sense that a new life has entered into me 
and, above all, I feel Your love in my heart. That is enough for me. 0 Lord, I will glorify the 
omnipotence of Your mercy for all eternity. Encouraged by Your goodness, I will confide to 
You all the sorrows of my heart. 

Jesus: Tell me all. My child, hide nothing from Me, because My loving Heart, the 
Heart of your Best Friend, is listening to you. 

Soul: 0 Lord, now I see all my ingratitude and Your goodness. You were pursuing me with 
Your grace, while I was frustrating Your benevolence. I see that I deserve the depths of hell 
for spurning Your graces. 

Jesus (interrupting): Do not be absorbed in your misery-you are still too weak to 
speak of it-but, rather, gaze on My Heart filled with goodness, and be imbued with 
My sentiments. Strive for meekness and humility; be merciful to others, as I am to 
you; and, when you feel your strength failing, if you come to the fountain of mercy 
to fortify your soul, you will not grow weary on your journey. 

Soul: Now I understand Your mercy, which protects me, and like a brilliant star, leads me 
into the home of my Father, protecting me from the horrors of hell that I have deserved, 
not once, but a thousand times. 0 Lord, eternity will hardly suffice for me to give due praise 
to Your unfathomable mercy and Your compassion for me. 

+ Conversation of the Merciful God with a Suffering Soul 



1487 Jesus: Poor soul, I see that you suffer much and that you do not have even the 
strength to coverse with me. So I will speak to you. Even though your sufferings 
were very great, do not lose heart or give in to despondency. But tell Me, my child, 
who has dared to wound your heart? Tell me about everything, be sincere in 
dealing with Me, reveal all the wounds of your heart. I will heal them, and your 
suffering will become a source of your sanctification. 

Soul: Lord, my sufferings are so great and numerous and have lasted so long that I become 
discouraged. 

Jesus: My child, do not be discouraged. I know your boundless trust in Me; I know 
you are aware of My goodness and mercy. Let us talk in detail about everything 
that weighs so heavily upon your heart. 

Soul: There are so many different things that I do not know what to speak about first, nor 
how to express it. 

Jesus: Talk to Me simply, as a friend to a friend. Tell Me now. My child, what 
hinders you from advancing in holiness? 

Soul: Poor health detains me on the way to holiness. I cannot fulfill my duties. I am as 
useless as an extra wheel on a wagon. I cannot mortify myself or fast to any extent, as the 
saints did. Furthermore, nobody believes I am sick, so that mental pain is added to those of 
the body, and I am often humiliated. Jesus, how can anyone become holy in such 
circumstances? 

J esus: True, My child, all that is painful. But there is no way to heaven except the 
way of the cross. I followed it first. You must learn that it is the shortest and 
surest way. 

Soul: Lord, there is another obstacle on the road to holiness. Because I am faithful to You, I 
am persecuted and suffer much. 

J esus: 1 1 is because you are not of this world that the world hates you. First it 
persecuted Me. Persecution is a sign that you are following in My footsteps

faithfully. 

Soul: My Lord, I am also discouraged because neither my superiors nor my confessor 
understand my interior trials. A darkness clouds my mind. How can I advance? All this 
discourages me from striving for the heights of sanctity. 

Jesus: Well, My child, this time you have told Me a good deal. I realize how painful 
it is not to be understood, and especially by those whom one loves and with whom 
one has been very open. But suffice it to know that I understand all your troubles 
and misery. I am pleased by the deep faith you have, despite everything, in My 
representatives. Learn from this that no one will understand a soul entireiy-that is 
beyond human ability. Therefore, I have remained on earth to comfort your aching 
heart and to fortify your soul, so that you will not falter on the way. You say that a 
dense darkness is obscuring your mind. But why, at such times, do you not come 
to Me, the light who can in an instant pour into your soul more understanding 
about holiness than can be found in any books? No confessor is capable of 
teaching and enlightening a soul in this way. 



Know, too, that the darkness about which you complain I first endured in the 
Garden of Olives when My Soul was crushed in mortal anguish. I am giving you a 
share in those sufferings because of My special love for you and in view of the 
high degree of holiness I am intending for you in heaven. A suffering soul is 
closest to My Heart. 

Soul: One more thing, Lord. What should I do when I am ignored and rejected by people, 
especially by those on whom I had a right to count in times of greatest need? 

Jesus: My child, make the resolution never to rely on people. Entrust yourself 
completely to My will saying, "Not as I want, but according to Your will, O God, let 
it be done unto me." These words, spoken from the depths of one's heart, can 
raise a soul to the summit of sanctity in a short time. I n such a soul I delight. Such 
a soul gives Me glory. Such a soul fills heaven with the fragrance of her virtue. But 
understand that the strength by which you bear sufferings comes from frequent 
Communions. So approach this fountain of mercy often, to draw with the vessel of 
trust whatever you need. 

Soul: Thank You, Lord, for Your goodness in remaining with us in this exile as the God of 
mercy and blessing us with the radiance of Your compassion and goodness. It is through the 
light of Your mercy that I have come to understand how much You love me. 

1488 Conversation of the Merciful God with a Soul Striving after Perfection. 

Jesus: I am pleased with your efforts, O soul aspiring for perfection, but why do I 
see you so often sad and depressed? Tell Me, My child, what is the meaning of this 
sadness, and what is its cause? 

Soul: Lord, the reason for my sadness is that, in spite of my sincere resolutions, I fall again 
into the same faults. I make resolutions in the morning, but in the evening I see how much 
I have departed from them. 

J esus: You see. My child, what you are of yourself. The cause of your falls is that 
you rely too much upon yourself and too little on Me. But let this not sadden you 
so much. You are dealing with the God of mercy, which your misery cannot 
exhaust. Remember, I did not allot only a certain number of pardons. 

Soul: Yes, I know all that, but great temptations assail me, and various doubts awaken 
within me and, moreover, everything irritates and discourages me. 

Jesus: My child, know that the greatest obstacles to holiness are discouragement 
and an exaggerated anxiety. These will deprive you of the ability to practice 
virtue. All temptations united together ought not disturb your interior peace, not 
even momentarily. Sensitiveness and discouragement are the fruits of self-love. 
You should not become discouraged, but strive to make My love reign in place of 
your self-love. Have confidence. My child. Do not lose heart in coming for pardon, 
for I am always ready to forgive you. As often as you beg for it, you glorify My 
mercy. 

Soul: I understand what is the better thing to do, what pleases You more, but I encounter 
great obstacles in acting on this understanding. 


Jesus: My child, life on earth is a struggle indeed; a great struggle for My kingdom. 



But fear not, because you are not alone. I am always supporting you, so lean on 
Me as you struggle, fearing nothing. Take the vessel of trust and draw from the

fountain of life-for yourself, but also for other souls, especially such as are 
distrustful of My goodness. 

Soul: 0 Lord, I feel my heart being filled with Your love and the rays of Your mercy and love 
piercing my soul. I go, Lord, at Your command. I go to conquer souls. Sustained by Your 
grace, I am ready to follow You, Lord, not only to Tabor, but also to Calvary. I desire to lead 
souls to the fount of Your mercy so that the splendor of Your mercy may be reflected in all 
souls, and the home of our Father be filled to overflowing. And when the enemy begins to 
attack me, I shall take refuge behind the shield of Your mercy. 

1489 Conversation of the Merciful God with a Perfect Soul. 

Soul: My Lord and Master, I desire to converse with You. 

J esus: Speak, My beloved child, for I am always listening. I wait for you. What do 
you desire to say? 

Soul: Lord, first let me pour out my heart at Your feet in a fragrant anointing of gratitude 
for the many blessings which You lavish upon me; even if I wanted to, I could not count 
them. I only recall that there has never been a moment in my life in which I have not 
experienced Your protection and goodness. 

Jesus: Your words please Me, and your thanksgiving opens up new treasures of 
graces. But, My child, we should talk in more detail about the things that lie in 
your heart. Let us talk confidentially and frankly, as two hearts that love one 
another do. 

Soul: O my merciful Lord, there are secrets in my heart which no one knows or will ever 
know except You because, even if I wanted to reveal them, no one would understand me. 
Your minister knows some because I confess to him, but he knows only the bit of these 
mysteries that I am capable of revealing; the rest remains between us for eternity, O My 
Lord! You have covered me with the cloak of Your mercy, pardoning my sins. Not once did 
You refuse Your pardon; You always had pity on me, giving me a new life of grace. To 
prevent doubts, You have entrusted me to the loving care of Your Church, that tender 
mother, who in Your name assures me of the truths of faith and watches lest I wander. 
Especially in the tribunal of Your mercy does my soul meet an ocean of favors, though You 
did not give the Fallen Angels time to repent or prolong their time of mercy. 0 my Lord, you 
have provided saintly priests to show me the sure way. Jesus, there is one more secret in 
my life, the deepest and dearest to my heart: it is You yourself when You come to my heart 
under the appearance of bread. Herein lies the whole secret of my sanctity. Here my heart 
is so united with Yours as to be but one. There are no more secrets, because all that is 
Yours is mine, and all that is mine is Yours. Such is the omnipotence and the miracle of 
Your mercy. All the tongues of men and of angels united could not find words adequate to 
this mystery of Your love and mercy. 

When I contemplate this mystery, my heart falls into a new ecstasy. In silence I tell You 
everything, Lord, because the language of love is without words; not a single stirring of my 
heart escapes You. 0 Lord, the extent of Your great condescension has awakened in my 
soul an even greater love for You, the sole object of my love. The life of union manifests 
itself in perfect purity, deep humility, gentle silence, and great zeal for the salvation of 
souls. 



0 my sweetest Lord, You watch over me each moment and inspire me as to how I should 
act in a precise situation, when my heart wavers between two things. You yourself 
frequently intervened in the resolution of a difficulty. Countless times, by means of a 
sudden enlightenment, You have given me to know what is the more pleasing to You. 

Oh, how numerous are the instances of forgiveness about which no one knows! How often 
You have poured into my soul courage and perseverance to go forward. It is You yourself 
who removed obstacles from my road, intervening directly in the actions of people. O Jesus, 
everything I have said to You is but a pale shadow of what is taking place in my heart. O 
my Jesus, how ardently I desire the conversion of sinners! You know what I am doing for 
them to win them for You. Every offense against You wounds me deeply. I spare neither 
strength, nor health, nor life itself in defense of Your kingdom. Although my efforts may 
remain invisible on earth, they are no less valuable in Your eyes.

O J esus, I want to bring souls to the fount of Your mercy to draw the reviving water of life 
with the vessel of trust. The soul desirous of more of God's mercy should approach God with 
greater trust; and if her trust in God is unlimited, then the mercy of God toward it will be 
likewise limitless. O my God, Who know every beat of my heart, You know how eagerly I 
desire that all hearts would beat for You alone, that every soul glorify the greatness of Your 
mercy. 

Jesus: My beloved child, delight of My Heart, your words are dearer and more 
pleasing to me than the angelic chorus. All the treasures of My Heart are open to 
you. Take from this Heart all that you need for yourself and for the whole world. 
For the sake of your love, I withhold the just chastisements, which mankind has 
deserved. A single act of pure love pleases Me more than a thousand imperfect 
prayers. One of your sighs of love atones for many offenses with which the 
godless overwhelm Me. The smallest act of virtue has unlimited value in My eyes 
because of your great love for Me. I n a soul that lives on My love alone, I reign as 
in heaven. I watch over it day and night. I n it I find My happiness; My ear is 
attentive to each request of its heart; often I anticipate its requests. O child, 
especially beloved by Me, apple of My eye, rest a moment near My Heart and taste 
of the love in which you will delight for all eternity. 

But child, you are not yet in your homeland; so go, fortified by My grace, and fight 
for My kingdom in human souls; fight as a king's child would; and remember that 
the days of your exile will pass quickly, and with them the possibility of earning 
merit for heaven. I expect from you. My child, a great number of souls who will 
glorify My mercy for all eternity. My child, that you may answer My call worthily, 
receive Me daily in Holy Communion. It will give you strength... 

Jesus, do not leave me alone in suffering. You know, Lord, how weak I am. I am an abyss 
of wretchedness, I am nothingness itself; so what will be so strange if You leave me alone 
and I fall? I am an infant, Lord, so I cannot get along by myself. However, beyond all 
abandonment I trust, and in spite of my own feeling I trust, and I am being completely 
transformed into trust-often in spite of what I feel. Do not lessen any of my sufferings, only 
give me strength to bear them. Do with me as You please, Lord, only give me the grace to 
be able to love You in every event and circumstance. Lord, do not lessen my cup of 
bitterness, only give me strength that I may be able to drink it all. 


0 Lord, sometimes You lift me up to the brightness of visions, and then again You plunge 



me into the darkness of night and the abyss of my nothingness, and my soul feels as if it 
were alone in the wilderness. Yet, above all things, I trust in You, Jesus, for You are 
unchangeable. My moods change, but You are always the same, full of mercy. 

1490 + Jesus, source of life, sanctify me. O my strength, fortify me. My Commander, fight for 
me. Only light of my soul, enlighten me. My Master, guide me. I entrust myself to You as a 
little child does to its mother's love. Even if all things were to conspire against me, and even 
if the ground were to give way under my feet, I would be at peace close to Your heart. You 
are always a most tender mother to me, and You surpass all mothers. I will sing of my pain 
to You by my silence, and You will understand me beyond any utterance... 

1491 + The Lord visited me today and said, My daughter, do not be afraid of what will 
happen to you. I will give you nothing beyond your strength. You know the power 
of My grace; let that be enough. After these words, the Lord gave me a deeper 
understanding of the action of His grace. 

1492 Before Holy Communion, Jesus gave me to understand that I should pay absolutely no 
attention to what a certain sister would say, because her cunning and malice were 
displeasing to Him. My daughter, do not speak to this person about either your 
views or your opinions. I begged the Lord's pardon for what in that soul was displeasing 
to Him, and I begged Him to strengthen me with His grace when she would come to talk 
with me again. She has asked me about many things, to which I gave answer with all my 
sisterly love and, as evidence that I have spoken to her from the bottom of my heart, I 
have told her some things that came from my own experience. But her intentions were

something quite different from the words on her lips... 

1493 + O my J esus, from the moment I gave myself completely to You, I have given no thought 
whatsoever for myself. You may do with me whatever You like. There is only one thing I 
think about; that is, what do You prefer; what can I do, 0 Lord, to please You. I listen and 
watch for each opportunity. It matters not if I am outwardly judged otherwise in this 
matter... 

1494 January 15, 1938. Today, when the sister about whom the Lord warned me came to see 
me, I armed myself spiritually for battle. Although it cost me much, I did not depart one bit 
from what the Lord had commanded. But when an hour had gone by, and the sister made 
no move to go, I interiorly called upon Jesus to help. Then I heard a voice in my soul 
saying, Do not fear. I am watching you this very moment and am helping you. I n a 
moment, I will send you two sisters who are coming to visit you, and then you will 
find it easy to continue the conversation. And at that moment two sisters entered, and 
then the conversation was much easier, even though it lasted for still another half hour. 

1495 Oh, how good it is to call on Jesus for help during a conversation. Oh, how good it is, during 
a moment of peace, to beg for actual graces. I fear most of all this sort of confidential 
conversation; there is need of much divine light at times like this, in order to speak with 
profit, both for the other person's soul, and for one's own as well. God, however, comes to 
our aid; but we have to ask Him for it. Let no one trust too much in his own self. 



1496 January 17, 1938. Today, since early in the morning, my soul has been in darkness. I 

cannot ascend to J esus, and I feel as though I have been forsaken by Him. I will not turn to 
creatures for light, because I know that they will not enlighten me if Jesus wills to keep me 
in darkness. I submit myself to His holy will and suffer. Still, the struggle is becoming more 
and more desperate. During Vespers, I wanted to unite myself with the sisters through 
prayer. 

1497 When I went, in my thoughts, to the chapel, my spirit was plunged into even greater 
darkness. Total discouragement came over me. Then I heard Satan's voice: "See how 
contradictory everything is that Jesus gives to you: He tells you to found a convent, and 
then He gives you sickness; He tells you to set about establishing this Feast of Mercy while 
the whole world does not at all want such a feast. Why do you pray for this feast? It is so 
inopportune." My soul remained silent and, by an act of will, continued to pray without 
entering into conversation with the Spirit of Darkness. Nevertheless, such an extraordinary 
disgust with life came over me that I had to make a great act of the will to consent to go on 
living. . . 

And again I heard the tempter's words: "Ask for death for yourself, tomorrow after Holy 
Communion. God will hear you, for He has heard you so many times before and has given 
you what you asked for." I remained silent and, by an act of will, I began to pray, or rather, 
submitted myself to God, asking Him interiorly not to abandon me at this moment. It was 
already eleven o'clock at night, and there was silence all around. The sisters were all asleep 
in their cells, and my soul alone was struggling with great exertion. 

The tempter went on: "Why should you bother about other souls? You ought to be praying 
only for yourself. As for sinners, they will be converted without your prayers. I see that you 
are suffering very much at this moment. I'm going to give you a piece of advice on which 
your happiness will depend: never speak about God's mercy and, in particular, do not 
encourage sinners to trust in God's mercy, because they deserve a just punishment. 

Another very important thing: do not tell your confessors, and especially this extraordinary 
confessor and the priest in Vilnius, about what goes on in your soul. I know them; I know 
who they are, and so I want to put you on your guard against them. You see, to live as a 
good nun, it is sufficient to live like all the others. Why expose yourself to so many 
difficulties?" 

1498 I remained silent, and by an act of will I dwelt in God, although a moan escaped from my 
heart. Finally, the tempter went away and I, exhausted, fell asleep immediately. In the 
morning, right after receiving Holy Communion, I went immediately to my cell and falling on

my knees I renewed my act of submission in all things to the will of God. "Jesus, I ask You, 
give me the strength for battle. Let it be done to me according to Your most holy will. My 
soul is enamored of Your most holy will." 

1499 At that moment, I saw J esus, who said, I am pleased with what you are doing. And 
you can continue to be at peace if you always do the best you can in respect to 
this work of mercy. Be absolutely as frank as possible with your confessor. 

Satan gained nothing by tempting you, because you did not enter into 
conversation with him. Continue to act in this way. You gave Me great glory today 
by fighting so faithfully. Let it be confirmed and engraved on your heart that I am 
always with you, even if you don't feel My presence at the time of battle. 



1500 Today, the love of God is transporting me into the other world. I am all immersed in love; I 
love and feel that I am loved, and with full consciousness I experience this. My soul is 
drowning in the Lord, realizing the great Majesty of God and its own littleness; but through 
this knowledge my happiness increases... This awareness is so vivid in the soul, so powerful 
and, at the same time, so sweet. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-52] 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

80 1-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101- 1 150 t 1151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-132 1 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401- 1450 t 1451 -1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804- 1 828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 5 


1501 + Now that I have difficulty sleeping at night, because my suffering won't allow it, I visit all 
the churches and chapels and, if only for a brief moment, I make an act of adoration before 
the Blessed Sacrament. When I return to my chapel, I then pray for certain priests who 
proclaim and glorify The Divine Mercy. I also pray for the intentions of the Holy Father and 
to obtain mercy for sinners-such are my nights. 

1502 January 20, 1938. I never cringe before anyone. I can't bear flattery, for humility is nothing 
but the truth. There is no cringing in true humility. Although I consider myself the least in 
the whole convent, on the other hand, I enjoy the honor of being the bride of Christ. Little 
matter that often I hear people say that I am proud, for I know that human judgment does 
not discern the motives for our actions. 

1503 When, at the beginning of my religious life, following the novitiate, I began to exercise 
myself particularly in humility, the humiliations that God sent me were not enough for me. 
And so, in my excessive zeal, I looked for more of them on my own, and I often 
represented myself to my superiors other than I was in reality and spoke of miseries of 
which I had no notion. But a short time later, Jesus gave me to know that humility is only 
the truth. From that time on, I changed my ideas, faithfully following the light of Jesus. I 
learned that if a soul is with J esus, He will not permit it to err. 

1504 + Lord, You know that since my youth I have always sought Your will and, recognizing it, 
have always tried to carry it out. My heart has been accustomed to the inspirations of the 
Holy Spirit, to whom I am faithful. In the midst of the greatest din I have heard the voice of 
God. I always know what is going on in my interior... 

1505 I am striving for sanctity, because in this way I shall be useful to the Church. I make 
constant efforts in practicing virtue. I try faithfully to follow Jesus. And I deposit this whole 
series of daily virtues-silent, hidden, almost imperceptible, but made with great love-in the 
treasury of God's Church for the common benefit of souls. I feel interiorly as if I were 
responsible for all souls. I know very well that I do not live for myself alone, but for the 
entire Church... 

1506 + O incomprehensible God, my heart dissolves in joy that You have allowed me to 
penetrate the mysteries of Your mercy! Everything begins with Your mercy and ends with

Your mercy. 



1507 All grace flows from mercy, and the last hour abounds with mercy for us. Let no one doubt 
concerning the goodness of God; even if a person's sins were as dark as night, God's mercy 
is stronger than our misery. One thing alone is necessary: that the sinner set ajar the door 
of his heart, be it ever so little, to let in a ray of God's merciful grace, and then God will do 
the rest. But poor is the soul who has shut the door on God's mercy, even at the last hour. 

It was just such souls who plunged J esus into deadly sorrow in the Garden of Olives; 
indeed, it was from His Most Merciful Heart that divine mercy flowed out. 

1508 J anuary 21, [ 1938]. J esus, how truly dreadful it would be to suffer if it were not for You. But 
it is You, Jesus, stretched out on the cross, who give me strength and are always close to 
the suffering soul. Creatures will abandon a person in his suffering, but You, 0 Lord, are 
faithful... 

1509 It often happens when one is ill, as in the case of Job in the Old Testament, that as long as 
one can move about and work, everything is fine and dandy; but when God sends illness, 
somehow or other, there are fewer friends about. But yet, there are some. They still take 
interest in our suffering and all that, but if God sends a longer illness, even those faithful 
friends slowly begin to desert us. They visit us less frequently, and often their visits cause 
suffering. Instead of comforting us, they reproach us about certain things, which is an 
occasion of a good deal of suffering. And so the soul, like J ob, is alone; but fortunately it is 
not alone, because Jesus Host is with it. 

After having tasted the above sufferings and spent a whole night in bitterness, the next 
morning, when the chaplain [Father Theodore] brought me Holy Communion, I had to 
control myself by sheer effort of will to keep from crying out at the top of my voice, 
"Welcome, my true and only Friend." Holy Communion gives me strength to suffer and 
fight. 

I wish to speak of one more thing that I have experienced: when God gives neither death 
nor health, and [when] this lasts for many years, people become accustomed to this and 
consider the person as not being ill. Then there begins a whole series of silent sufferings. 
Only God knows how many sacrifices the soul makes. 

1510 One evening, when I was feeling so bad that I wondered how I would get back to my cell, I 
came across the Sister Assistant [Sister Seraphina], who was asking one of the sisters of 
the first choir to go to the gate with a certain message. But when she saw me, she said to 
her, "No, Sister, you need not go, but Sister Faustina will, because it is raining heavily." I 
answered, "All right," and went and carried out the order, but only God knows the whole of 
it. This is just one example among many. Sometimes it would seem that a sister of the 
second choir 232 is made of stone, but she also is human and has a heart and feelings... 

1511 At such times, God Himself comes to our rescue, for otherwise the soul would not be able to 
bear these crosses of which I haven't even begun to write, nor do I intend to do so now. But 
when I feel the inspiration to do so, I will write about them... 


1512 Today, during Mass, I saw the Lord Jesus in the midst of His sufferings, as though dying on 
the cross. He said to me, My daughter, meditate frequently on the sufferings which I 
have undergone for your sake, and then nothing of what you suffer for Me will 
seem great to you. You please Me most when you meditate on My Sorrowful 
Passion. Join your little sufferings to My Sorrowful Passion, so that they may have 
infinite value before My Majesty. 

1513 + Jesus said to me today, You often call Me your Master. This is pleasing to My 
Heart; but do not forget. My disciple, that you are a disciple of a crucified Master. 
Let that one word be enough for you. You know what is contained in the cross. 

1514 + I have learned that the greatest power is hidden in patience. I see that patience always 
leads to victory, although not immediately; but that victory will become manifest after 
many years. Patience is linked to meekness. 

1515 + I spent this whole night with Jesus in the dark dungeon. This was a night of adoration. 

The sisters were praying in the chapel, and I was uniting myself with them in spirit, because 
poor health prevents me from going to the chapel. But all night long I could not fall asleep,

so I spent the night in the dark prison with J esus. J esus gave me to know of the sufferings 
He experienced there. The world will learn about them on the day of judgment. 

1516 My daughter, tell souls that I am giving them My mercy as a defense. I Myself am 
fighting for them and am bearing the just anger of My Father. 

1517 Say, My daughter, that the Feast of My Mercy has issued forth from My very depths for the 
consolation of the whole world. 

1518 Jesus, my peace and my rest, I beg You to give light to that sister, so that she may change 
interiorly, Support her powerfully with Your grace, so that she, too, may attain perfection. 

1519 + Today before Holy Communion, the Lord said to me, My daughter, today talk openly 
to the Superior [Mother Irene] about My mercy because, of all the superiors, she 
has taken the greatest part in proclaiming My mercy. And in fact, Mother Superior 
came this afternoon, and we talked about this Work of God. Mother told me that the images 
had not come out too well and were not selling very well. "But," she said, "I have taken a 
good quantity myself and am distributing them wherever I can and do the best I can to 
spread the Work of Mercy." When she had gone, the Lord gave me to know how pleasing 
this soul was to Him. 

1520 Today the Lord said to me, I have opened My Heart as a living fountain of mercy. Let 
all souls draw life from it. Let them approach this sea of mercy with great trust. 
Sinners will attain justification, and the just will be confirmed in good. Whoever 
places his trust in My mercy will be filled with My divine peace at the hour of 
death. 



1521 The Lord said to me, My daughter, do not tire of proclaiming My mercy. I n this way 
you will refresh this Heart of Mine, which burns with a flame of pity for sinners. 
Tell My priests that hardened sinners will repent on hearing their words when they 
speak about My unfathomable mercy, about the compassion I have for them in My 
Heart. To priests who proclaim and extol My mercy, I will give wondrous power; I 
will anoint their words and touch the hearts of those to whom they will speak. 

1522 Community life is difficult in itself, but it is doubly difficult to get along with proud souls. "0 
God, give me 1 a deeper faith that I may always see in every sister Your holy image which 
has been engraved in her soul... 

1523 Everlasting love, pure flame, burn in my heart ceaselessly and deify my whole being, 
according to Your infinite pleasure by which You summoned me into existence and called 
me to take part in Your everlasting happiness. 0 merciful Lord, it is only out of mercy that 
You have lavished these gifts upon me. Seeing all these free gifts within me, with deep 
humility I worship Your incomprehensible goodness. Lord, my heart is filled with 
amazement that You, absolute Lord, in need of no one, would nevertheless stoop so low out 
of pure love for us. I can never help being amazed that the Lord would have such an 
intimate relationship with His creatures. That again is His unfathomable goodness. Every 
time I begin this meditation, I never finish it, because my spirit becomes entirely drowned 

in Him. What a delight it is to love with all the force of one's soul and to be loved even more 
in return, to feel and experience this with the full consciousness of one's being. There are 
no words to express this. 

1524 January 25, 1938. My Jesus, how good and patient You are! You often look upon us as little 
children. We often beg You, but we don't know what for, because towards the end of the 
prayer, when You give us what we have asked for, we do not want to accept it. 

1525 One day, a certain sister came to me and asked me for prayers, telling me that she could 
no longer stand things as they were. "And so, please pray, Sister." I answered that I would, 
and I began a novena to The Divine Mercy. I learned that God would give her the grace, but 
that she would once again be dissatisfied when she received it. However, I kept on praying 
as she had asked me to do. The next day, the same sister came looking for me, and when 
we again began to talk about the same thing, I told her, "You know, Sister, when we pray, 
we ought not force the Lord God to give us what we want, but we should rather submit to 
His holy will." But she thought that what she was asking for was indispensable. Towards the 
end of the novena, the