 complete freedom in 
directing your soul. God is jealous of our hearts and wants us to love Him alone." 



338 When I started to look deep within myself, I did not find any attachment to anything, but as 
in all things that concern me, so also in this matter, I was afraid and distrustful of myself. 
Tired out by this detailed selfexamination, I went before the Blessed Sacrament and asked 
Jesus with all my heart, "Jesus, my Spouse, Treasure of my heart, You know that I know You 
alone and that I have no other love but You; but, Jesus, if I were about to become attached 
to anything that is not You, I beg and entreat You, Jesus, by the power of Your mercy, let 
instant death descend upon me, for I prefer to die a thousand times than to be unfaithful to 
You once in even the smallest thing." 

339 At that moment, Jesus suddenly stood before me, coming I know not from where, radiant 
with unbelievable beauty, clothed in a white garment, with uplifted arms, and He spoke these 
words to me, My daughter, your heart is My repose; it is My delight. I find in it 
everything that is refused Me by so many souls. Tell this to My representative. And 

an instant later, I saw nothing, but a whole ocean of consolations entered my soul. 

340 I know now that nothing can put a stop to my love for You, Jesus, neither suffering, nor 
adversity, nor fire nor the sword, nor death itself. I feel stronger than all these things. 

Nothing can compare with love. I see that the smallest things done by a soul that loves God 
sincerely have an enormous value in His Holy eyes. 

341 November 5, 1934. One morning, when it was my duty to open the gate to let out our people

who deliver baked goods, I entered the little chapel to visit Jesus for a minute and to renew 
the intentions of the day. Today, Jesus, I offer You all my sufferings, mortifications and 
prayers for the intentions of the Holy Father, so that he may approve the Feast of Mercy. 

But, Jesus, I have one more word to say to You: I am very surprised that You bid me to talk 
about this Feast of Mercy, for they tell me that there is already such a feastrsn and so why 
should I talk about it? And J esus said to me, And who knows anything about this feast? 
No one! Even those who should be proclaiming My mercy and teaching people about 
it often do not know about it themselves. That is why I want the image to be 
solemnly blessed on the first Sunday after Easter, and I want it to be venerated 
publicly so that every soul may know about it. Make a novena for the Holy Father's 
intention. It should consist of thirty-three acts; that is, repetition that many times 
of the short prayer-which I have taught you-to The Divine Mercy. 

342 Suffering is the greatest treasure on earth; it purifies the soul. In suffering, we learn who our 
true friend is. 

343 True love is measured by the thermometer of suffering. J esus, I thank You for the little daily 
crosses, for opposition to my endeavors, for the hardships of communal life, for the 
misinterpretation of my intentions, for humiliations at the hands of others, for the harsh way 
in which we are treated, for false suspicions, for poor health and loss of strength, for self- 
denial, for dying to myself, for lack of recognition in everything, for the upsetting of all my 
plans. 

Thank You, Jesus, for interior sufferings, for dryness of spirit, for terrors, fears and 
incertitudes, for the darkness and the deep interior night, for temptations and various 
ordeals, for torments too difficult to describe, especially for those which no one will 
understand, for the hour of death with its fierce struggle and all its bitterness. 

I thank You, Jesus, You who first drank the cup of bitterness before You gave it to me, in a 
much milder form. I put my lips to this cup of Your holy will. Let all be done according to 


Your good pleasure; let that which Your wisdom ordained before the ages be done to me. I 
want to drink the cup to its last drop, and not seek to know the reason why. In bitterness is 
my joy, in hopelessness is my trust. I n You, 0 Lord, all is good, all is a gift of Your paternal 
Heart. I do not prefer consolations over bitterness or bitterness over consolations, but thank 
You, O J esus, for everything! It is my delight to fix my gaze upon You, 0 incomprehensible 
God! My spirit abides in these mysterious dwelling places, and there I am at home. I know 
very well the dwelling place of my Spouse. I feel there is not a single drop of blood in me 
that does not burn with love for You. 

0 Uncreated Beauty, whoever comes to know You once cannot love anything else. I can feel 
the bottomless abyss of my soul, and nothing will fill it but God himself. I feel that I am 
drowned in Him like a single grain of sand in a bottomless ocean. 

December 20, 1934. 

344 One evening as I entered my cell, I saw the Lord Jesus exposed in the monstrance under the 
open sky, as it seemed. At the feet of Jesus I saw my confessor, and behind him a great 
number of the highest ranking ecclesiastics, clothed in vestments the like of which I had 
never seen except in this vision; and behind them, groups of religious from various orders; 
and further still I saw enormous crowds of people, which extended far beyond my vision. I 
saw the two rays coming out from the Host, as in the image, closely united but not 
intermingled; and they passed through the hands of my confessor, and then through the 
hands of the clergy and from their hands to the people, and then they returned to the Host... 
and at that moment I saw myself once again in the cell which I had just entered. 

345 December 22, 1934. When it was possible for me to go to confession during the week, I 
happened to get there when my confessor was saying Holy Mass. During the third part of the 
Mass I saw the I nfant J esus, a little smaller than usual and with this difference, that He was 
wearing a violet tunic. He usually has a white one. 

346 December 24, 1934. The Vigil of Christmas. During the morning Mass, I felt the closeness of 
God. Though I was hardly aware of it, my spirit was drowned in God. Suddenly, I heard these

words:You are My delightful dwelling place; My Spirit rests in you. After these words, I 
felt the Lord looking into the depths of my heart; and seeing my misery, I humbled myself in 
spirit and admired the immense mercy of God, that the Most High Lord would approach such 
misery. 

During Holy Communion, joy filled my soul. I felt that I am closely united to the Godhead. 

His omnipotence enveloped my whole being. Throughout the whole day I felt the closeness of 
God in a special manner; and although my duties prevented me throughout the whole day 
from going to chapel even for a moment, there was not a moment when I was not united 
with God. I felt Him within me more distinctly than ever. Unceasingly greeting the Mother of 
God and entering into Her spirit, I begged Her to teach me true love of God. And then I 
heard these words: / will share with you the secret of My happiness this night during Holy 
Mass. 

We had supper before six o'clock. Despite all the joy and the external noise accompanying 
the sharing of the wafer and the mutual exchange of good wishes, I did not for a moment 
lose the awareness of God's presence. After supper we hurried away to finish our work, and 
at nine I was able to go to the chapel for adoration. I was allowed to stay up and wait for the 
Midnight Mass. I was delighted to have free time from nine until midnight. From nine to ten 
o'clock I offered my adoration for my parents and my whole family. From ten to eleven, I 



offered it for the intention of my spiritual director, in the first place thanking God for granting 
me this great visible help here on earth, just as He had promised me, and I also asked God 
to grant him the necessary light so that he could get to know my soul and guide me 
according to God's good pleasure. And from eleven to twelve I prayed for the Holy Church 
and the clergy, for sinners, for the missions and for our houses. I offered the indulgences for 
the souls in purgatory. 

Twelve O'clock, December 25, 1934 

347 Midnight Mass. As Holy Mass began, I immediately felt a great interior recollection; joy filled 
my soul. During the offertory, I saw Jesus on the altar, incomparably beautiful. The whole 
time the Infant kept looking at everyone, stretching out His little hands. During the elevation, 
the Child was not looking towards the chapel but up to heaven. After the elevation He looked 
at us again, but just for a short while, because He was broken up and eaten by the priest in 
the usual manner. His pinafore was now white. The next day I saw the same thing, and on 
the third day as well. It is difficult for me to express the joy of my soul. The vision was 
repeated at the three Masses in the same way as in the first ones. 

1934. 

348 The first Thursday after Christmas. I completely forgot it was Thursday and so did not make 
my adoration. At nine o'clock I went directly to the dormitory with the other sisters. But 
strangely enough, I could not fall asleep. It seemed to me that I had not yet done something 
that I was supposed to do. Mentally, I reviewed all my duties, and could not recollect 
anything. This lasted until ten o'clock. At ten, I saw the Sorrowful Face of Jesus. Then Jesus 
spoke these words to me: I have been waiting to share My suffering with you, for who 
can understand My suffering better than My spouse? I asked pardon of Jesus for my 
coldness. Ashamed and not daring to look at the Lord Jesus, but with a contrite heart, I 
asked Him to give me one thorn from His crown. He answered that He would grant me this 
favor, but not until tomorrow, and immediately the vision disappeared. 

349 In the morning, during meditation, I felt a painful thorn in the left side of my head. The 
suffering continued all day. I meditated continually about how Jesus had been able to endure 
the pain of so many thorns which made up His crown. I joined my suffering to the sufferings 
of Jesus and offered it for sinners. At four o'clock when I came for adoration, I saw one of 
our wards offending God greatly by sins of impure thoughts. I also saw a certain person who 
was the cause of her sin. My soul was pierced with fear, and I asked God, for the sake of 
Jesus' pain, to snatch her from this terrible misery. 

350 Jesus answered that He would grant her that favor, not for her sake, but for the sake of my 
request. Now I understood how much we ought to pray for sinners, and especially for our 
wards.

Our life is truly apostolic; I cannot imagine a religious living in one of our houses; that is, in 
our Community, and not having an apostolic spirit. Zeal for the salvation of souls should burn 
in our hearts. 



Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251 -300 


301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-521 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1 001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1 151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-1321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 1 


351 0 my God, how sweet it is to suffer for You, suffer in the most secret recesses of the heart, 
in the greatest hiddenness, to burn like a sacrifice noticed by no one, pure as crystal, with no 
consolation or compassion. My spirit burns in active love. I waste no time in dreaming. I take 
every moment singly as it comes, for this is within my power. The past does not belong to 
me; the future is not mine; with all my soul I try to make use of the present moment. 

January 4, 1935. The first chapters; of Mother Borgia . lml 

352 At the chapter, Mother [Borgia] stressed a life of faith and fidelity in small things. Half way 
through the chapter, I heard these words: I desire that you would all have more faith at 
the present time. How great is My joy at the faithfulness of My spouse in the 
smallest things. Then I looked at the crucifix and saw that J esus' head was turned towards 
the refectory, and His lips were moving. 

When I told Mother Superior about it, she answered, "You see, Sister, how Jesus demands 
that our life be a life of faith." 

353 When Mother left for the chapel and I stayed to set the room in order, I heard these words: 

Tell all the sisters that I demand that they live in the spirit of faith towards the 
superiors at this present time. I begged my confessor to release me from this duty. 

354 As I was talking to a certain personmn who was to paint the image but, for certain reasons, 
was not painting it, I heard this voice in my soul: I want her to be more obedient. I 
understood that our efforts, no matter how great, are not pleasing to God if they do not bear 
the seal of obedience; I am speaking about a religious soul. 0 God, how easy it is to know 
Your will in the convent! We religious have God's will set clearly before our eyes from 
morning till night, and in moments of uncertainty we have our superiors through whom God 
speaks. 

355 1934-1935. New Year's Eve. I was given permission not to go to sleep, but rather pray in the 
chapel. One of the sisters had asked me to offer an hour of adoration for her. I said yes, and 
prayed for her for an hour. During the hour, God gave me to understand how very pleasing 
this soul was to Him. 

I offered the second hour of adoration for the conversion of sinners, and I tried especially to 
offer expiation to God for the insults that were being committed against Him at this present 
moment. How greatly God is being offended! 

I offered the third hour for my spiritual director. I fervently prayed for light for him in a 
particular matter. Finally the clock struck twelve, the last hour of the year. I finished it in the 
Name of the Holy Trinity, and I also started the first hour of the New Year in the Name of the 
Holy Trinity. I asked each of the Three Persons to bless me and, with great confidence, 
looked toward the New Year which certainly would not be sparing of suffering. 


356 O Blessed Host, in whom is contained the testament of God's mercy for us, and especially for 
poor sinners. 

O Blessed Host, in whom is contained the Body and Blood of the Lord Jesus as proof of 
infinite mercy for us, and especially for poor sinners. 

0 Blessed Host, in whom is contained life eternal and of infinite mercy, dispensed in 
abundance to us and especially to poor sinners. 

0 Blessed Host, in whom is contained the mercy of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit 
toward us, and especially toward poor sinners.

0 Blessed Host, in whom is contained the infinite price of mercy which will compensate for all 
our debts, and especially those of poor sinners. 

0 Blessed Host, in whom is contained the fountain of living water which springs from infinite 
mercy for us, and especially for poor sinners. 

O Blessed Host, in whom is contained the fire of purest love which blazes forth from the 
bosom of the Eternal Father, as from an abyss of infinite mercy for us, and especially for 
poor sinners. 

O Blessed Host, in whom is contained the medicine for all our infirmities, flowing from infinite 
mercy, as from a fount, for us and especially for poor sinners. 

O Blessed Host, in whom is contained the union between God and us through His infinite 
mercy for us, and especially for poor sinners. 

0 Blessed Host, in whom are contained all the sentiments of the most sweet Heart of Jesus 
toward us, and especially poor sinners. 

0 Blessed Host, our only hope in all the sufferings and adversities of life. 

0 Blessed Host, our only hope in the midst of darkness and of storms within and without. 

O Blessed Host, our only hope in life and at the hour of our death. 

O Blessed Host, our only hope in the midst of adversities and floods of despair. 

O Blessed Host, our only hope in the midst of falsehood and treason. 

0 Blessed Host, our only hope in the midst of the darkness and godlessness which inundate 
the earth. 0 Blessed Host, our only hope in the longing and pain in which no one will 
understand us. 

0 Blessed Host, our only hope in the toil and monotony of everyday life. 

0 Blessed Host, our only hope amid the ruin of our hopes and endeavors. 

0 Blessed Host, our only hope in the midst of the ravages of the enemy and the efforts of 
hell. 

O Blessed Host, I trust in You when the burdens are beyond my strength and I find my 
efforts are fruitless. 



0 Blessed Host, I trust in You when storms toss my heart about and my fearful spirit tends to 
despair. 

0 Blessed Host, I trust in You when my heart is about to tremble and mortal sweat moistens 
my brow. 

0 Blessed Host, I trust in You when everything conspires against me and black despair 
creeps into my soul. 

0 Blessed Host, I trust in You when my eyes will begin to grow dim to all temporal things 
and, for the first time, my spirit will behold the unknown worlds. 

0 Blessed Host, I trust in You when my tasks will be beyond my strength and adversity will 
become my daily lot. 

O Blessed Host I trust in You when the practice of virtue will appear difficult for me and my 
nature will grow rebellious. 

0 Blessed Host, I trust in You when hostile blows will be aimed against me. 

0 Blessed Host, I trust in You when my toils and efforts will be misjudged by others. 

0 Blessed Host, I trust in You when Your judgments will resound over me; it is then that I 
will trust in the sea of Your mercy. 

357 +Most Holy Trinity, I trust in Your infinite mercy. God is my Father and so I, His child, have 
every claim to His divine Heart; and the greater the darkness, the more complete our trust 
should be. 

358 I do not understand how it is possible not to trust in Him who can do all things. With Him, 
everything; without Him, nothing. He is Lord. He will not allow those who have placed all 
their trust in Him to be put to shame. 

359 January 10, 1935. +Thursday. In the evening during benediction, issi such thoughts as these 
began to distress me: Is not perhaps all this that I am saying about God's great mercy just a 
lie or an illusion...? And I wanted to think about this for a while, when I heard a strong and 
clear inner voice saying, Everything that you say about My goodness is true; language 
has no adequate expression to extol My goodness. These words were so filled with 
power and so clear that I would give my life in declaring they came from God. I can tell this 
by the profound peace that accompanied them at that time and that still remains with me. 
This peace gives me such great strength and power that all difficulties, adversities, 
sufferings, and death itself are as nothing. This light gave me a glimpse of the truth that all 
my efforts to bring souls to know the mercy of the Lord are very pleasing to God. And from 
this springs such great joy in my soul that I do not know whether it could be any greater in 
heaven. Oh, if souls would only be willing to listen, at least a little, to the voice of conscience

and the voicethat is, the inspirations-of the Holy Spirit! I say "at least a little," because once 
we open ourselves to the influence of the Holy Spirit, He himself will fulfill what is lacking in 
us. 


+ New Year 1935 


360 Jesus likes to intervene in the smallest details of our life, and He often fulfills secret wishes of 
mine that I sometimes hide from Him, although I know that from Him nothing can be hidden. 

There is a custom among us of drawing by lot, on New Year's Day, special Patrons for 
ourselves for the whole year. In the morning during meditation, there arose within me a 
secret desire that the Eucharistic Jesus be my special Patron for this year also, as in the past. 
But, hiding this desire from my Beloved, I spoke to Him about everything else but that. When 
we came to refectory for breakfast, we blessed ourselves and began drawing our patrons. 
When I approached the holy cards on which the names of the patrons were written, without 
hesitation I took one, but I didn't read the name immediately as I wanted to mortify myself 
for a few minutes. Suddenly, I heard a voice in my soul: I am your patron. Read. I looked 
at once at the inscription and read, "Patron for the Year 1935-the Most Blessed Eucharist." 

My heart leapt with joy, and I slipped quietly away from the sisters and went for a short visit 
before the Blessed Sacrament, where I poured out my heart. But Jesus sweetly admonished 
me that I should be at that moment together with the sisters. I went immediately in 
obedience to the rule. 

Holy Trinity, One God, 

361 incomprehensible in the greatness of Your mercy for creatures, and especially for poor 
sinners, You have made known the abyss of Your mercy, incomprehensible and unfathomable 
[as it is] to any mind, whether of man or angel. Our nothingness and our misery are drowned 
in Your greatness. 0 infinite goodness, who can ever praise You sufficiently? Can there be 
found a soul that understands You in Your love? O J esus, there are such souls, but they are 
few. 

362 +One day, during the morning meditation, I heard this voice: I myself am your director; I 
was, I am, and I will be. And since you asked for visible help, I chose and gave you 
a director even before you had asked, for My work required this. Know that the 
faults you commit against him wound My Heart. Be especially on your guard against 
self-willfulness; even the smallest thing should bear the seal of obedience. 

With a crushed and humbled heart I begged forgiveness of J esus for these faults. I also 
begged pardon of my spiritual director and resolved to do nothing rather than to do many 
things wrongly. 

363 O good J esus, thank You for the great grace of making known to me what I am of myself: 
misery and sin, and nothing more. I can do only one thing of myself, and that is to offend 
You, O my God, because misery can do no more of itself than offend You, 0 infinite 
Goodness! 



364 +Once I was asked to pray for a certain soul. I decided at once to make a novena to the 
Merciful Lord to which I added a mortification; namely, that I would wear chains imi on both 
legs throughout Holy Mass. I had been doing this already for three days when I went to 
confession and told my spiritual director that I had undertaken this mortification, presuming 
permission to do so. I had thought he would not object, but I heard the contrary; that is, 
that I should do nothing without permission. 0 my Jesus, so it was willfulness again! But my 
falls do not discourage me; I know very well that 1 am misery [itself]. Because of the 
condition of my health I did not receive this permission, and my spiritual director was 
surprised that I had been allowing myself greater mortifications without his permission. I 
asked pardon for my self-willfulness, or rather for having presumed permission, and I asked 
him to change this mortification for another one. 

365 My spiritual director replaced it with an interior mortification; namely, throughout Holy Mass I 
was to meditate on why the Lord Jesus had submitted to being baptized. The meditation was 
no mortification for me, for thinking about God is a delight and not a mortification; but there 
was a mortification of the will in that I was not doing [simply] what I like, but what I was told 
to do, and it is in this that interior mortification consists. When I left the confessional and 
started to recite my penance, I heard these words: I have granted the grace you asked

for on behalf of that soul, but not because of the mortification you chose for 
yourself. Rather, it was because of your act of complete obedience to My 
representative that I granted this grace to that soul for whom you interceded and 
begged mercy. Know that when you mortify your own self-will, then Mine reigns 
within you. 

366 0 my J esus, be patient with me. I will be more careful in the future. I will rely, not upon 
myself, but upon Your grace and Your very great goodness to miserable me. 

367 +On one occasion, Jesus gave me to know that when I pray for intentions which people are 
wont to entrust to me, He is always ready to grant His graces, but souls do not always want 
to accept them: My Heart overflows with great mercy for souls, and especially for 
poor sinners. I f only they could understand that I am the best of Fathers to them 
and that it is for them that the Blood and Water flowed from My Heart as from a 
fount overflowing with mercy. For them I dwell in the tabernacle as King of Mercy. 

I desire to bestow My graces upon souls, but they do not want to accept them. You, 
at least, come to Me as often as possible and take these graces they do not want to 
accept. I n this way you will console My Heart. Oh, how indifferent are souls to so 
much goodness, to so many proofs of love! My Heart drinks only of the ingratitude 
and forgetfulness of souls living in the world. They have time for everything, but 
they have no time to come to Me for graces. 

So I turn to you, you-chosen souls, will you also fail to understand the love of My 
Heart? Here, too. My Heart finds disappointment; I do not find complete surrender 
to My love. So many reservations, so much distrust, so much caution. To comfort 
you, let Me tell you that there are souls living in the world who love Me dearly. I 
dwell I n their hearts with delight. But they are few. I n convents too, there are souls 
that fill My Heart with joy. They bear My features; therefore the Heavenly Father 
looks upon them with special pleasure. They will be a marvel to Angels and men. 
Their number is very small. They are a defense for the world before the justice of 
the Heavenly Father and a means of obtaining mercy for the world. The love and 
sacrifice of these souls sustain the world in existence. The infidelity of a soul 
specially chosen by Me wounds My Heart most painfully. Such infidelities are 


swords which pierce My Heart. 

368 January 29, 1935. This Tuesday morning during meditation, I had an interior vision of the 
Holy Father saying Mass. After the Pater Noster, he talked to J esus about that matter which 
Jesus had ordered me to tell him. Although I have not spoken to the Holy Father personally, 
this matter was taken care of by someone else [Father Sopocko r87i 1; at this moment, 
however, I knew by interior knowledge that the Holy Father was considering this matter, 
which will soon come to pass in accordance with the desires of Jesus. 

369 Before the eight-day retreat, I went to my spiritual director and asked him for certain 
mortifications for the time of the retreat. However, I did not receive permission for 
everything I asked for, but for some things only. I received permission for one hour of 
meditation on the Passion of the Lord J esus and for a certain humiliation. But I was a little 
dissatisfied at not receiving permission for everything I had asked. When we returned home, 

I dropped into the chapel for a moment, and then I heard this voice in my soul: There is 
more merit to one hour of meditation on My sorrowful Passion than there is to a 
whole year of flagellation that draws blood; the contemplation of My painful 
wounds is of great profit to you, and it brings Me great joy. I am surprised that you 
still have not completely renounced your self-will, but I rejoice exceedingly that 
this change will be accomplished during the retreat. 

370 That same day, when I was in church waiting for confession, I saw the same rays issuing 
from the monstrance and spreading throughout the church. This lasted all through the 
service. After the Benediction, [the rays shone out] to both sides and returned again to the 
monstrance. Their appearance was bright and transparent like crystal. I asked Jesus that He 
deign to light the fire of His love in all souls that were-cold. Beneath these rays a heart will 
grow warm even if it were like a block of ice; even if it were hard as a rock, it will crumble 
into dust. 

+ 

J.M.J.

Vilnius, February 4, 1935 
Eight-day retreat. 

371 Jesus, King of Mercy, again the time has come when I am alone with You. Therefore I beg 
You, by all the love with which Your Heart burns, to destroy completely within me my self- 
love and, on the other hand, to enkindle in my heart the fire of Your purest love. 

372 In the evening, after the conference, I heard these words: I am with you. During this 
retreat, I will strengthen you in peace and in courage so that your strength will not 
fail in carrying out My designs. Therefore you will cancel out your will absolutely in 
this retreat and, instead. My complete will shall be accomplished in you. Know that 
it will cost you much, so write these words on a clean sheet of paper: "From today 
on, my own will does not exist," and then cross out the page. And on the other side 
write these words: "From today on, I do the will of God everywhere, always, and in 
everything." Be afraid of nothing; love will give you strength and make the 
realization of this easy. 


373 In the fundamental meditation about the goal; that is, of choosing love: the soul must love; 
it has need of loving. The soul must divert the stream of its love, but not into the mud or into 
a vacuum, but into God. How I rejoice when I reflect on this, for I feel clearly that He himself 
is in my heart. J ust J esus alone! I love creatures insofar as they help me to become united 
with God. I love all people because I see the image of God in them. 

374J.M.J Vilnius, Februrary 4, 1935 

[page in the Dairy with the words "From today on my will does not exist" crossed out with a 
large 'X'] 

The moment I knelt down to cross out my own will, as the Lord had bid me to do, I heard 
this voice in my soul: From today on, do not fear God's judgment, for you will not be 
judged 

[The next page has...] 

J.M.J Vilnius, February 4, 1935 

From today on, I do the Will of God everywhere, always, and in everyth ing.jjjsi 
+ J .M.J . Vilnius, February 8, 1935 

375 Particular interior practice; that is, the examination of conscience. Self-denial, denial of my 
own will. 

I . The denial of my reason. Subjecting it to the reason of those who represent God to me 
here on earth. 

I I . The denial of my will. Doing the will of God, which is revealed in the will of those who 
represent God to me and which is contained in the rule of our order. 

III. The denial of my judgment. Accepting immediately and without reflection, analysis or 
reasoning all orders given by those who represent God to me. 

IV. The denial of my tongue. I will not give it the least bit of freedom; but in one case only I 
will give it complete freedom; that is, in proclaiming the glory of God. Whenever I receive 
Holy Communion, I will ask J esus to fortify and cleanse my tongue that I may not injure my 
neighbor with it. That is why I have the greatest respect for the rule which speaks about 
silence. 

376 My Jesus, I trust that Your grace will help me to carry out these resolutions. Although the 
above points are contained in the vow of obedience, I want to practice these things in a 
special way, because this is the essence of the religious life. Merciful Jesus, I beg You 
fervently to enlighten my mind so that I may come to know You better, You who are the 
Infinite Being, and that I may get to know myself better, who am nothingness itself. 


377 Concerning Holy Confession. We should derive two kinds of profit from Holy Confession: 

1. We come to confession to be healed; 

2. We come to be educated-like a small child, our soul has constant need of education. 

0 my Jesus, I understand these words to their very depths, and I know from my own 
experience that, on its own strength, the soul will not go far; it will exert itself greatly and 
will do nothing for the glory of God; it will err continually, because our mind is darkened and 
does not know how to discern its own affairs. I shall pay special attention to two things: 
firstly, I will choose, in making my confession, that which humiliates me most, even if it be a 
trifle, but something that costs me much, and for that reason I will tell it; secondly, I will 
practice contrition, not only during confession, but during every self-examination, and I will 
arouse within myself an act of perfect contrition, especially when I am going to bed. One 
more word: a soul which sincerely wants to advance in perfection must observe strictly the

advice given by the spiritual director. There is as much holiness as there is dependence. 

378 Once as I was talking with my spiritual director, I had an interior vision-quicker than 
lightning-of his soul in great suffering, in such agony that God touches very few souls with 
such fire. The suffering arises from this work. There will come a time when this work, which 
God is demanding so very much, will be as though utterly undone. And then God will act with 
great power, which will give evidence of its authenticity. It will be a new splendor for the 
Church, although it has been dormant in it from long ago. That God is infinitely merciful, no 
one can deny. He desires everyone to know this before He comes again as J udge. He wants 
souls to come to know Him first as King of Mercy. When this triumph comes, we shall already 
have entered the new life in which there is no suffering. But before this, your soul [of the 
spiritual director] will be surfeited with bitterness at the sight of the destruction of your 
efforts. However, this will only appear to be so, because what God has once decided upon, 

He does not change. But although this destruction will be such only in outward appearance, 
the suffering will be real. When will this happen? I do not know. How long will it last? I do not 
know. [89i But God has promised a great grace especially to you and to all those... who will 
proclaim My great mercy. I shall protect them Myself at the hour of death, as My 
own glory. And even if the sins of soul are as dark as night, when the sinner turns 
to My mercy he gives Me the greatest praise and is the glory of My Passion. When a 
soul praises My goodness, Satan trembles before it and flees to the very bottom of 
hell. 

379 During one of the adorations, Jesus promised me that: With souls that have recourse to 
My mercy and with those that glorify and proclaim My great mercy to others, I will 
deal according to My infinite mercy at the hour of their death. 

My Heart is sorrowful, Jesus said, because even chosen souls do not understand the 
greatness of My mercy. Their relationship [with Me] is, in certain ways, imbued 
with mistrust. Oh, how much that wounds My Heart 1 Remember My Passion, and if 
you do not believe My words, at least believe My wounds. 

380 I make no movement, no gesture after my own liking, because I am bound by grace; I 
always consider what is more pleasing to Jesus. 


381 When meditating once on obedience, I heard these words: In this meditation, the priest 
[ 90 ] is speaking particularly for you. Know that I am borrowing his lips. I tried to 
listen most attentively to everything and to apply everything to my own heart, as in every 
meditation. When the priest said that an obedient soul was filled with the power of God... 

Yes, when you are obedient I take away your weakness and replace it with My 
strength. I am very surprised that souls do not want to make that exchange with 

Me. I said to the Lord, "Jesus, enlighten my heart, or else I, too, will not understand much 
from these words." 

382 I know that I live, not for myself, but for a great number of souls. I know that graces granted 
me are not for me alone, but for souls. 0 J esus, the abyss of Your mercy has been poured 
into my soul, which is an abyss of misery itself. Thank You, J esus, for the graces and the 
pieces of the Cross which You give me at each moment of my life. 

383 At the beginning of the retreat, I saw, on the ceiling of the chapel, J esus nailed to the Cross. 
He was looking at the sisters with great love, but not at all of them. There were three sisters 
at whom Jesus looked severely, for what reasons I do not know. I only know what a terrible 
thing it is to meet with such a look, which is the look of a severe J udge. That look was not 
directed at me, and yet I was paralyzed with terror. I still tremble as I write these words. I 
did not dare to say so much as a single word to Jesus. My physical strength failed me, and I 
thought I would not live to the end of the conference. The next day, I saw the same thing 
again, just as I had seen it the first time, and this time I dared to speak these words: "Jesus, 
how great is Your mercy!" 

On the third day, that gaze of great kindness upon all the sisters, except the three, was 
again repeated. I gathered up my courage, which drew its force from love of neighbor, and I 
said to the Lord, "You, who are Mercy Itself, as You yourself told me, I beg You by the power

of Your mercy, to look then with kindness at these three sisters as well. And if this is not in 
accord with Your wisdom, I ask You for an exchange: turn to them the kind look meant for 
my soul, and let Your severe gaze at their souls be turned on me." Jesus then said to me 
these words: My daughter, for the sake of your sincere and generous love, I grant 
them many graces although they are not asking Me for them. But I am doing so 
because of the promise I have made to you. And at that moment, He turned a merciful 
look towards those three sisters as well. My heart leapt with joy to see the goodness of God. 

384 When I stayed for adoration from nine to ten o'clock, four other sisters stayed; too. When 1 
approached the altar and began to meditate on the Passion of the Lord J esus, a terrible pain 
immediately filled my soul because of the ingratitude of so many souls living in the world; 
but particularly painful was the ingratitude of souls especially chosen by God. There is no 
notion or comparison [which can describe it]. At the sight of this blackest ungratefulness I 
felt as though my heart were torn open; my strength failed me completely, and I fell on my 
face, not attempting to hide my loud cries. Each time I thought of God's great mercy and of 
the ingratitude of souls, pain stabbed at my heart, and I understood how painfully it 
wounded the sweetest Heart of Jesus. With a burning heart, I renewed my act of self- 
oblation on behalf of sinners. 


385 With joy and longing I have pressed my lips to the bitterness of the cup which I receive each 
day at Holy Mass. It is the share which Jesus has allotted to me for each moment, and I will 
not relinquish it to anyone. I will comfort the most sweet Eucharistic Heart continuously and 
will play harmonious melodies on the strings of my heart. Suffering is the most harmonious 
melody of all. I will assiduously search out that which will make Your Heart rejoice today! 

The days of my life are not monotonous. When dark clouds cover the sun, like the eagle I will 
try to brave the billows and make known to others that the sun is not dying out. 

386 I feel that God will let me draw aside the veils [of heaven] so that the earth will not doubt 
His goodness. God is not subject to eclipse or change. He is forever one and the same; 
nothing can contradict His will. I feel within myself a power greater than human. I feel 
courage and strength thanks to the grace that dwells in me. 1 understand souls who are 
suffering against hope, for 1 have gone through that fire myself. But God will not give [us 
anything] beyond our strength. Often have I lived hoping against hope, and have advanced 
my hope to complete trust in God. Let that which He has ordained from all ages happen to 
me. 

A general principle. 

387 It would be a very ugly thing for a religious to seek relief from suffering. 

388 See what grace and reflection made out of the greatest criminal. He who is dying has much 
love: "Remember me when You are in paradise." Heartfelt repentance immediately 
transforms the soul. The spiritual life is to be lived earnestly and sincerely. 

389 Love must be reciprocal. If Jesus tasted the fullness of bitterness for me, then I, His bride, 
will accept all bitterness as proof of my love for Him. 

390 He who knows how to forgive prepares for himself many graces from God. As often as I look 
upon the cross, so often will I forgive with all my heart. 

391 Through Holy Baptism, we entered into union with other souls. Death tightens the bonds of 
love. I ought always to be of help to others. If I am a good religious, I will be useful, not only 
to the Order, but to the whole Country as well. 

392 The Lord God grants His graces in two ways: by inspiration and by enlightenment. If we ask 
God for a grace, He will give it to us; but let us be willing to accept it. And in order to accept 
it, self-denial is needed. Love does not consist in words or feelings, but in deeds. It is an act 
of the will; it is a gift; that is to say, a giving. The reason, the will, the heart-these three 
faculties must be exercised during prayer. I will rise from the dead in Jesus, but first I must 
live in Him. If I do not separate myself from the Cross, then the Gospel will be revealed in 
me. Jesus in me makes up for all my deficiencies. His grace operates without ceasing. The 
Holy Trinity grants me Its life abundantly, by the gift of the Holy Spirit. The Three Divine

Persons live in me. When God loves, He loves with all His Being, with all the power of His 
Being. If God has loved me in this way, how should I respond I, His spouse? 

393 During one conference, Jesus said to me, You are a sweet grape in a chosen cluster; I 
want others to have a share in the juice that is flowing within you. 



394 During the renewal of the vows,L9ii I saw the Lord J esus on the Epistle side [of the altar], 
wearing a white garment with a golden belt and holding a terrible sword in His hand. This 
lasted until the moment when the sisters began to renew their vows. Then I saw a 
resplendence beyond compare and, in front of this brilliance, a white cloud in the shape of a 
scale. Then Jesus approached and put the sword on one side of the scale, and it fell heavily 
towards the ground until it was about to touch it. Just then, the sisters finished renewing 
their vows. Then I saw Angels who took something from each of the sisters and placed it in a 
golden vessel somewhat in the shape of a thurible. When they had collected it from all the 
sisters and placed the vessel on the other side of the scale, it immediately outweighed and 
raised up the side on which the sword had been laid. At that moment, a flame issued forth 
from the thurible, and it reached all the way to the brilliance. Then I heard a voice coming 
from the brilliance: Put the sword back in its place; the sacrifice is greater. Then Jesus 
gave us His blessing, and all I had seen vanished. The sisters had already begun to receive 
Holy Communion. When I received Holy Communion, my soul was filled with such great joy 
that I am unable to describe it. 

395 [February] 15, 1935. A few days' visit at my parents' home [921 to see my dying mother. 

When I learned that my mother was seriously ill and near death, and that she had asked that 
I come home, as she wanted to see me once more before dying, a host of emotions were 
awakened in my heart. As a child who sincerely loves its mother, I wanted very much to 
fulfill her wish. But I left this to God and resigned myself completely to His will. Paying no 
heed to the ache in my heart, I followed God's will. On the morning of my name day, 
February fifteen, Mother Superior gave me a second letter from my family and granted me 
permission to go to my parents' home to fulfill the wish and request of my dying mother. I 
began at once to make the necessary preparations for the journey and left Vilnius in the 
evening. I offered the whole night for my seriously ill mother, that God might grant her the 
grace of losing none of the merits of her suffering. 

396 My traveling companions were very kind; several women of the Sodality of Mary were in the 
same compartment with me. I sensed that one of them was suffering greatly and fighting a 
difficult battle in her soul. I began to pray in spirit for this soul. At eleven o'clock these 
women went to another compartment for a chat, leaving only the two of us behind in the 
carriage. I could feel that my prayer was causing this soul's struggle to become even fiercer. 

I did not console her, but prayed all the more fervently. Finally, the lady turned to me and 
asked if she was obliged to fulfill a certain promise which she had made to God. At that 
moment, I received inner knowledge of the promise and replied, "You are absolutely obliged 
to keep it, or else you will be miserable for the rest of your life. This thought will pursue you 
everywhere and give you no peace." Surprised at my answer, she opened her soul to me. 

She was a schoolteacher. When she was about to take her examinations, she had promised 
God that if she did well in her examinations she would devote herself to His service; that is, 
enter a religious congregation. She passed the examinations very well. "But," she said, 

"when I entered into the hustle and bustle of the world, I no longer wanted to enter a 
convent. However, my conscience has given me no peace, and despite amusements I am 
always unhappy." 

After a lengthy conversation, she was completely changed and told me that she would 
immediately take steps to enter a convent. She asked me to pray for her, and I felt that God 
would be generous with His grace. 


397 That morning I arrived in Warsaw, and at eight o'clock that evening I was already at home. 
What a joy it was for my parents and for the whole family! It is difficult to describe it. My

mother's health had improved a bit, but the doctor gave no hope of complete recovery. After 
greeting each other, we knelt down to thank God for the grace of being able to be together 
once again in this life. 

398 When I saw how my father prayed, I was very much ashamed that, after so many years in 
the convent, I was not able to pray with such sincerity and fervor. And so 1 never cease 
thanking God for such parents. 

399 Oh, how everything had changed beyond recognition during those ten years! The garden had 
been so small, and now I could not recognize it. My brothers and sisters had still been 
children, and now they were all grown up. I was surprised that I did not find them as they 
had been when we parted. Stanley accompanied me to church every day. I felt that he was 
very pleasing to God. 

400 On the last day, when everyone had left the church, I went before the Blessed Sacrament 
with him, and together we recited the Te Deum. After a moment of silence, I offered his soul 
to the Sweetest Heart of Jesus. How easy it was to pray in that little church! I remembered 
all the graces that I had received there, and which I had not understood at the time and had 
so often abused. I wondered how I could have been so blind. And as I was thus regretting 
my blindness, I suddenly saw the Lord J esus, radiant with unspeakable beauty, .. and He 
said to me with kindness, My chosen one, I will give you even greater graces that you 
may be the witness of My infinite mercy throughout all eternity. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-1 50 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-52] 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-1321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 - 1450 t 145 1 -1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804- 1 828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 


Notebook 1 


401 The days at home passed in much company, as everybody wanted to see me and talk with 
me. Often I could count as many as twenty-five people there. They listened with great 
interest to my accounts of the lives of the saints. It seemed to me that our house was truly 
the house of God, as each evening we talked about nothing but God. When, tired from these 
talks and yearning for solitude and silence, I quietly slipped out into the garden in the 
evening so I could converse with God alone, even in this I was unsuccessful; immediately my 
brothers and sisters came and took me into the house and, once again, I had to talk, with all 
those eyes fixed on me. But I struck on one way of getting some respite; I asked my 
brothers to sing for me, inasmuch as they had lovely voices; and besides, one played the 
violin and another, the mandolin. And during this time I was able to devote myself to interior 
prayer without shunning their company. 

What also cost me a lot was that I had to kiss the children. The women I knew came with 
their children and asked me to take them in my arms, at least for a moment, and kiss them. 
They regarded this as a great favor, and for me it was a chance to practice virtue, since 
many of the children were quite dirty. But in order to overcome my feelings and show no 
repugnance, I would kiss such a dirty child twice. One of these friends came with a child 
whose eyes were diseased and filled with pus, and she said to me, "Sister, take it in your 
arms for a moment, please." My nature recoiled, but not paying attention to anything, I took 
the child and kissed it twice, right on the infection, asking God to heal it. 

I had many opportunities to practice virtue. I listened to people pour out their grievances, 
and I saw that no heart was joyful, because no heart truly loved God; and this did not 
surprise me at all. I was very sorry not to have seen two of my sisters. I felt interiorly that 
their souls were in great danger. Pain gripped my heart at the thought of them. Once, when I 
felt very close to God, I fervently asked the Lord to grant them grace, and the Lord answered

me, I am granting them not only necessary graces, but special graces as well. I 
understood that the Lord would call them to a greater union with Him. I rejoice immensely 
that such great love reigns in our family. 

402 As I was taking leave of my parents and asking for their blessing, I felt the power of the 
grace of God being poured out upon my soul. My father, my mother and my godmother 
blessed me with tears in their eyes, wished me the greatest faithfulness to God's graces, and 
begged me never to forget how many graces God had granted me in calling me to the 
religious life. They asked me to pray for them. Although everyone was crying, I did not shed 
a single tear; I tried to be brave and comforted them as best I could, reminding them of 
heaven where there would be no more parting. Stanley walked me to the car. I told him how 
much God loves pure souls and assured him God was satisfied with him. When I was telling 
him about the goodness of God and of how He thinks of us, he burst out crying like a little 
child, and I was not surprised, for this was a pure soul and, as such, more capable of 
recognizing God. 



403 Once I was in the car, I let my heart have its way, and I, too, cried like a baby, for joy that 
God was granting our family so many graces, and I became steeped in a prayer of 
thanksgiving. 

By evening I was already in Warsaw. Firstly, I greeted the Lord of the house [Jesus in the 
Eucharist], and then I went to greet the whole community. 

404 When I entered