 I steeped myself in prayer, entrusting myself to the special protection of the 
Mother of God. She alone is always with me. She, like a good Mother, watches over all my 
trials and efforts. 

799 Suddenly, I saw the Lord Jesus, who said to me, Be at peace. My child. See, you are not 
alone. My Heart watches over you. J esus filled me with strength concerning a certain 
person. I feel strength within my soul. A moral principle. 

800 If one does not know what is better, one must reflect, consider and seek advice, because one 
must not act with an uncertain conscience. When uncertain, say to . yourself: "Whatever I do 
will be good. I have the intention of doing good." The Lord God accepts what we consider 
good, and the Lord God also accepts and considers it as good. One should not worry if, after 
some time, one sees that these things are not good. God looks at the intention with which we 
begin, and will reward us accordingly. This is a principle which we ought to follow. 



Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251 -300 


301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-52] 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1 001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101- 1150 t 1 151-1200 t 1 201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-132 1 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 1450 t 145 1-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803

Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 


Notebook 2 


801 Today, I still managed to pay a short visit to the Lord [in the Eucharist] before going to bed. 
My spirit was immersed in Him as in its only treasure. My heart rested a while near the Heart 
of my Spouse. I received light as to how I should behave toward those around me, and then 

I returned to my solitude. The doctor is taking good care of me; all those around me are very 
kind to me. 

802 December 10, [1936]. I got up earlier today and made my meditation before Holy Mass. Holy 
Mass is at six o'clock here. After Holy Communion my spirit was drowned in the Lord as in 
the sole object of its love. I felt absorbed by His omnipotence. When I came back to my 
private room, I felt sick and had to lie down at once. The sister risoi brought me some 
medication, but I felt bad all day. In the evening, I tried to make a Holy Hour, but I could not 
do so; all I could do was unite myself with the suffering Jesus. 

803 My room is next to the men's ward. I didn't know that men were such chatterboxes. From 
morning till late at night, there is talk about various subjects. The women's ward is much 
quieter. It is women who are always blamed for this; but I have had occasion to be 
convinced that the opposite is true. It is very difficult for me to concentrate on my prayer in 
the midst of these jokes and this laughter. They do not disturb me when the grace of God 
takes complete possession of me, because then I do not know what is going on around me. 

804 My J esus, how little these people talk about You. They talk about everything but You, J esus. 
And if they talk so little [about You], it is quite probable that they do not think about You at 
all. The whole world interests them; but about You, their Creator, there is silence. Jesus, I 
am sad to see this great indifference and ingratitude of creatures. O my Jesus, I want to love 
You for them and to make atonement to You, by my love. 

I mmaculate Conception of the Mother of God. 

805 From early morning, I felt the nearness of the Blessed Mother. During Holy Mass, I saw Her, 
so lovely and so beautiful that I have no words to express even a small part of this beauty. 
She was all [in] white, with a blue sash around Her waist. Her cloak was also blue, and there 
was a crown on Her head. Marvelous light streamed forth from Her whole figure. I am the 
Queen of heaven and earth, but especially the Mother of your [Congregation] . She pressed 
me to Her heart and said, / feel constant compassion for you. I felt the force of Her 
Immaculate Heart which was communicated to my soul. Now I understand why I have been 
preparing for this feast for two months and have been looking forward to it with such 
yearning. From today onwards, I am going to strive for the greatest purity of soul, that the 
rays of God's grace may be reflected in all their brilliance. I long to be a crystal in order to 
find favor in His eyes. 


806 + That same day, I saw a certain priest [probably Father Sopocko or Father Andrasz] who 
was surrounded by the light which flowed from Her; evidently, this soul loves the Immaculate 
One, 

807 An extraordinary yearning fills my soul. I am surprised that it does not separate the soul 
from the body. I desire God; I want to become immersed in Him. I understand that I am in a 
terrible exile; my soul aspires for God with all its might. 0 you inhabitants of my fatherland, 
be mindful of this exile! When will the veils be lifted for me as well? Although I see and feel 
to a certain extent how very thin is the veil separating me from the Lord, I long to see Him 
face to face; but let everything be done according to Your will. 

808 December 11. I could not assist at the whole Mass today; I assisted at only the most 
important parts, and after receiving Holy Communion I immediately returned to my solitude. 
The presence of God suddenly enveloped me, and at the same moment I felt the Passion of 
the Lord, for a very short while. During that moment, I attained a more profound knowledge 
of the work of mercy. 

809 During the night, I was suddenly awakened and knew that some soul was asking me for

prayer, and that it was in much need of prayer. Briefly, but with all my soul, I asked the Lord 
for grace for her. 

810 The following afternoon, when I entered the ward, I saw someone dying, and learned that 
the agony had started during the night. When I verified it- it had been at the time when I had 
been asked for prayer. And just then, I heard a voice in my soul: Say the chaplet which I 
taught you. I ran to fetch my rosary and knelt down by the dying person and, with all the 
ardor of my soul, I began to say the chaplet. Suddenly the dying person opened her eyes and 
looked at me; I had not managed to finish the entire chaplet when she died, with 
extraordinary peace. I fervently asked the Lord to fulfill the promise He had given me for the 
recitation of the chaplet. The Lord gave me to know that the soul had been granted the grace 
He had promised me. That was the first soul to receive the benefit of the Lord's promise. I 
could feel the power of mercy envelop that soul. 

811 When I entered my solitude, I heard these words: At the hour of their death, I defend as 
My own glory every soul that will say this chaplet; or when others say it for a dying 
person, the indulgence is the same. When this chaplet is said by the bedside of a 
dying person, God's anger is placated, unfathomable mercy envelops the soul, and 
the very depths of My tender mercy are moved for the sake of the sorrowful 
Passion of My Son. 

Oh, if only everyone realized how great the Lord's mercy is and how much we all need that 
mercy, especially at that crucial hour! 

812 + Today I have fought a battle with the spirits of darkness over one soul. How terribly Satan 
hates God's mercy! I see how he opposes this whole work. 

813 + O merciful Jesus, stretched on the cross, be mindful of the hour of our death. O most 
merciful Heart of Jesus, opened with a lance, shelter me at the last moment of my life. O 
Blood and Water, which gushed forth from the Heart of Jesus as a fount of unfathomable 
mercy for me at the hour of my death, O dying J esus, Hostage of mercy, avert the Divine 
wrath at the hour of my death. 



814 + December 12, [1936]. Today, I only received Holy Communion and stayed for a few 
moments of the Mass. All my strength is in You, 0 Living Bread. It would be difficult for me 
to live through the day if I did not receive Holy Communion. It is my shield; without You, 
Jesus, I know not how to live. 

815 Jesus, my Love, today gave me to understand how much He loves me, although there is such 
an enormous gap between us, the Creator and the creature; and yet, in a way, there is 
something like equality: love fills up the gap. He himself descends to me and makes me 
capable of communing with Him. I immerse myself in Him, losing myself as it were; and yet, 
under His loving gaze, my soul gains strength and power and an awareness that it loves and 
is especially loved. It knows that the Mighty One protects it. Such prayer, though short, 
benefits the soul greatly, and whole hours of ordinary prayer do not give the soul that light 
which is given by a brief moment of this higher form of prayer. 

816 + This afternoon, I had my first open-air rest [on the sunny veranda at the sanatorium]. 
Sister Felicia nsn visited me today and brought a few necessary things and some lovely 
apples and words of greeting from our beloved Mother Superior and dear sisters. 

December 13, [1936]. Confession before Jesus. 

817 When I reflected that I had not been to confession for more than three weeks, I wept seeing 
the sinfulness of my soul and certain difficulties. I had not gone to confession because the 
circumstances made it impossible. On the day of confessions, I had been confined to bed. 

The following week, confessions were in the afternoon, and I had left for the hospital that 
morning. This afternoon, Father Andrasz came into my room and sat down to hear my 
confession. Beforehand, we did not exchange a single word. I was delighted because I was 
extremely anxious to go to confession. As usual, I unveiled my whole soul. Father gave a 
reply to each little detail. I felt unusually happy to be able to say everything as I did. For 
penance, he gave me the Litany of the Holy Name of J esus. When I wanted to tell him of the 
difficulty I have in saying this litany, he rose and began to give me absolution. Suddenly his 
figure became diffused with a great light, and I saw that it was not Father A., but J esus. His

garments were bright as snow, and He disappeared immediately. At first, I was a little 
uneasy, but after a while a kind of peace entered my soul; and I took note of the fact that 
Jesus heard the confession in the same way that confessors do; and yet something was 
wondrously transpiring in my heart during this confession; I couldn't at first understand what 
it signified. 

818 December 16, [1936]. I have offered this day for Russia. I have offered all my sufferings and 
prayers for that poor country. After Holy Communion, Jesus said to me, I cannot suffer 
that country any longer. Do not tie my hands. My daughter. I understood that if it had 
not been for the prayers of souls that are pleasing to God, that whole nation would have 
already been reduced to nothingness. Oh, how I suffer for that nation which has banished 
God from its borders! 

819 + 0 inexhaustible spring of Divine Mercy, pour yourself out upon us! Your Goodness knows 
no limits. Confirm, 0 Lord, the power of Your mercy over the abyss of my misery, for You 
have no limit to Your mercies. Wonderful and matchless is Your mercy, astonishing the 
human and angelic mind. 


820 My Guardian Angel told me to pray for a certain soul, and in the morning I learned that it 
was a man whose agony had begun that very moment. The Lord Jesus makes it known to me 
in a special way when someone is in need of my prayer. I especially know when my prayer is 
needed by a dying soul. This happens more often now than it did in the past. 

821 The Lord J esus gave me to know how very pleasing to Him is a soul who lives in accordance 
with the will of God. It thereby gives very great glory to God... 

822 I have come to understand today that even if I did not accomplish any of the things the Lord 
is demanding of me, I know that I shall be rewarded as if I had fulfilled everything, because 
He sees the intention with which I begin, and even if He called me to himself today, the work 
would not suffer at all by that, because He himself is the Lord of both the work and the 
worker. My part is to love Him to folly; all works are nothing more than a tiny drop before 
Him. It is love that has meaning and power and merit. He has opened up great horizons in 
my soul- love compensates for the chasms. 

823 December 17, [1936]. I have offered this day for priests. I have suffered more today than 
ever before, both interiorly and exteriorly. I did not know it was possible to suffer so much in 
one day. I tried to make a Holy Hour, in the course of which my spirit had a taste of the 
bitterness of the Garden of Gethsemane. I am fighting alone, supported by His arm, against 
all the difficulties that face me like unassailable walls. But I trust in the power of His name 
and I fear nothing. 

824 In this seclusion, Jesus himself is my Master. He himself educates and instructs me. I feel 
that I am the object of His special action. For His inscrutable purposes and unfathomable 
decrees, He unites me to Himself in a special way and allows me to penetrate His 
incomprehensible mysteries. There is one mystery which unites me with the Lord, of which 
no one-not even angels-may know. And even if I wanted to tell of it, I would not know how 
to express it. And yet, I live by it and will live by it for ever. This mystery distinguishes me 
from every other soul here on earth or in eternity. 

825 + O bright and clear day on which all my dreams will be fulfilled; 0 day so eagerly desired, 
the last day of my life! I look forward with joy to the last stroke the Divine Artist will trace on 
my soul, which will give my soul a unique beauty that will distinguish me from the beauty of 
other souls. O great day, on which divine love will be confirmed in me. On that day, for the 
first time, I shall sing before heaven and earth the song of the Lord's fathomless mercy. This 
is my work and the mission which the Lord has destined for me from the beginning of the 
world. That the song of my soul may be pleasing to the Holy Trinity, do You, O Spirit of God, 
direct and form my soul yourself. I arm myself with patience and await Your coming, 0 
merciful God, and as to the terrible pains and fear of death, at this moment more than at any 
other time, I trust in the abyss of Your mercy and am reminding You, O merciful J esus, sweet 
Savior, of all the promises You have made to me. 



826 This morning I had an adventure. My watch had stopped, and I did not know when to get up,

and I thought of what a misfortune it would be to miss Holy Communion. It was still dark, so 
I had no way of knowing whether it was time to get up. I dressed, made my meditation and 
went to the chapel, but everything was still locked, and silence reigned everywhere. I 
steeped myself in prayer, especially for the sick. I now see how much the sick have need of 
prayer. Finally, the chapel was opened. I found it difficult to pray because I was already 
feeling very exhausted, and immediately after Holy Communion I returned to my room. Then 
I saw the Lord, who said to me, Know, My daughter, that the ardor of your heart is 
pleasing to Me. And just as you desire ardently to become united with Me in Holy 
Communion, so too do I desire to give Myself wholly to you; and as a reward for 
your zeal, rest on My Heart. At that moment, my spirit was immersed in His Being, like a 
drop in a bottomless ocean. I drowned myself in Him as in my sole treasure. Thus I came to 
recognize that the Lord allows certain difficulties for His greater glory. 

827 December 18, [1936]. Today I felt bad that a week had gone by and no one had come to 
visit me. r 1521 When I complained to the Lord, He answered, I sn't it enough for you that I 
visit you every day? I apologized to the Lord and the hurt vanished. 0 God, my strength, 
You are sufficient for me. 

828 This evening, I learned that a certain soul was in need of my prayer. I prayed fervently, but 
felt that this was still not enough, so I continued to pray for a longer time. On the following 
day, I learned that the agony of a certain soul had started at just that time and had 
continued until morning. I recognized what struggles it had gone through. In a strange way, 
the Lord J esus makes known to me that a dying soul has need of my prayer. I feel vividly 
and clearly that spirit who is asking me for prayer. I was not aware that souls are so closely 
united, and often it is my Guardian Angel who tells me. 

829 During Holy Mass, the little I nfant J esus brings joy to my soul. Often, distance does not exist - 
I see a certain priest who brings Him down. I am awaiting Christmas with great yearning; I 
am living in expectation together with the Most Holy Mother. 

830 0 Light Eternal, who come to this earth, enlighten my mind and strengthen my will that I 
may not give up in times of great affliction. May Your light dissipate all the shadows of doubt. 
May Your omnipotence act through me. I trust in You, 0 uncreated Light! You, 0 Infant 
Jesus, are a model for me in accomplishing Your Father's will, You, who said, "Behold, I come 
to do Your will." Grant that I also may do God's will faithfully in all things. 0 Divine Infant, 
grant me this grace! 

831 0 my J esus, my soul was yearning for the days of trial, but do not leave me alone in the 
darkness of my soul. Rather, do You hold me firmly, close to Yourself. Set a guard over my 
lips, so that the fragrance of my sufferings may be known and pleasing to You alone. 


832 O merciful Jesus, how longingly You hurried to the Upper Room to consecrate the Host that I 
am to receive in my life. Jesus, You desired to dwell in my heart. Your living Blood unites 
with mine. Who can understand this close union? My heart encloses within itself the 
Almighty, the Infinite One. 0 Jesus, continue to grant me Your divine life. Let Your pure and 
noble Blood throb with all its might in my heart. I give You my whole being. Transform me 
into Yourself and make me capable of doing Your holy will in all things and of returning Your 
love. O my sweet Spouse, You know that my heart knows no one but You. You have opened 
up in my heart an insatiable depth of love for You. From the very first moment it knew You, 
my heart has loved You and has lost itself in You as its one and only object. May Your pure 
and omnipotent love be the driving force of all my actions. Who will ever conceive and 
understand the depth of mercy that has gushed forth from Your Heart? 

833 I have experienced how much envy there is, even in religious life. I see that there are few 
truly great souls, ready to trample on everything that is not God. 0 soul, you will find no 
beauty outside of God. Oh, how fragile is the foundation of those who elevate themselves at 
the expense of others! What a loss! 

834 December 19, [1936]. This evening, I felt in my soul , that a certain person had need of my

prayer. Immediately, I began to pray. Suddenly, I realize interiorly and am aware of who the 
spirit is who is asking this of me; I pray until I feel at peace. There is great help for the dying 
in this chaplet. I often pray for an intention that I have learned of interiorly. I always pray 
until I experience in my soul that the prayer has had its effect. 

835 Especially now, while I am in this hospital, I experience an inner communion with the dying 
who ask me for prayer when their agony begins. God has given me a wondrous contact with 
the dying! Since this has been happening more frequently, I have been able to verify it, even 
to the exact hour. 

Today I was awakened suddenly at eleven o'clock at night and clearly felt the presence near 
me of some spirit who was asking me for prayer. Some force simply compelled me to pray. 
My vision is purely spiritual, by means of a sudden light that God grants me at that moment. 

I keep on praying until I feel peace in my soul, and not always for an equally long time; 
because sometimes it happens that with one "Hail Mary" I am already at peace, and then I 
say the De Profundis and pray no longer. And sometimes it happens that I pray the entire 
chaplet and only then feel at peace. I have also discovered that if I feel constrained to pray 
for a longer time; that is to say, I experience interior unrest, the soul is undergoing a greater 
struggle and is going through a longer final agony. 

This is how I have verified the exact time: I have a watch, and I look to see what time it is. 
On the following day, when they tell me about that person's death, I ask them about the 
time, and it exactly corresponds, as does the length of the person's last agony. They say to 
me, "Such and such a person died today, but she passed away quickly and peacefully." It 
sometimes happens that the dying person is in the second or third building away, yet for the 
spirit, space does not exist. It sometimes happens that I know about a death occurring 
several hundred kilometers away. This has happened several times with regard to my family 
and relatives and also sisters in religion, and even souls whom I have not known during their 
lifetime. 

O God of fathomless mercy, who allow me to give relief and help to the dying by my 
unworthy prayer, be blessed as many thousand times as there are stars in the sky and drops 
of water in all the oceans! Let Your mercy resound throughout the orb of the earth, and let it 
rise to the foot of Your throne, giving praise to the greatest of Your attributes; that is, Your 



incomprehensible mercy. 0 God, this unfathomable mercy enthralls anew all the holy souls 
and all the spirits of heaven. These pure spirits are immersed in holy amazement as they 
glorify this inconceivable mercy of God, which in turn arouses even greater admiration in 
them, and their praise is carried out in a perfect manner. 0 eternal God, how ardently I 
desire to glorify this greatest of Your attributes; namely, Your unfathomable mercy. I see all 
my littleness, and cannot compare myself to the heavenly beings who praise the Lord's 
mercy with holy admiration. But I, too, have found a way to give perfect glory to the 
incomprehensible mercy of God. 

836 0 most sweet J esus, who have deigned to allow miserable me to gain a knowledge of Your 
unfathomable mercy; 0 most sweet Jesus, who have graciously demanded that I tell the 
whole world of Your incomprehensible mercy, this day I take into my hands the two rays that 
spring from Your merciful Heart; that is, the Blood and the Water; and I scatter them all over 
the globe so that each soul may receive Your mercy and, having received it, may glorify it for 
endless ages. 0 most sweet Jesus who, in Your incomprehensible kindness, have deigned to 
unite my wretched heart to Your most merciful Heart, it is with Your own Heart that I glorify 
God, our Father, as no soul has ever glorified Him before. 

837 December 21, [1936]. The radio is always playing in the afternoon, so I feel the loss of 
silence. All morning long, there is ceaseless talk and noise. My God, I was looking forward to 
being in silence, happy that I should be talking only with the Lord, and here it is just the 
opposite. Yet, nothing disturbs me now, neither the talking nor the radio. In a word-nothing. 
By the grace of God, when I am praying I do not even know where I am; I know only that 
my soul is united with the Lord. And thus I pass my days in this hospital.

838 + I marvel at how many humiliations and sufferings that priest accepts in this whole matter. 
fi53i I see this at particular times, and I support him with my unworthy prayers. Only God 
can give one such courage; otherwise one would give up. But I see with joy that all these 
adversities contribute to God's greater glory. The Lord has few such souls. 0 infinite eternity, 
you will make manifest the efforts of heroic souls, because the earth rewards their efforts 
with hatred and ingratitude. Such souls do not have friends; they are solitary. And in this 
solitude, they gain strength; they draw their strength from God alone. With humility, but also 
with courage, they stand firmly in the face of all the storms that beat upon them. Like high- 
towering oaks, they are unmoved. And in this there is just this one secret: that it's from God 
that they draw this strength, and everything whatsoever they have need of, they have for 
themselves and for others. They not only carry their own burden, but also know how to take 
on, and are capable of taking on, the burdens of others. They are pillars of light along God's 
ways; they live in light themselves and shed light upon others. They themselves live on the 
heights, and know how to show the way to lesser ones and help them attain those heights. 

839 + My Jesus, You see that I do not know how to write well and, on top of that, I don't even 
have a good pen. And often it scratches so badly that I must put sentences together, letter 
by letter. And that is not all. I also have the difficulty of keeping secret from the sisters the 
things I write down, and so I often have to shut my notebook every few minutes and listen 
patiently to someone's story, and then the time set aside for writing is gone. And when I shut 
the notebook suddenly, the ink smears. I write with the permission of my superiors and at 
the command of my confessor. It is a strange thing: sometimes the writing goes quite well, 
but at other times, I can hardly read it myself. 


840 December 23, [1936]. I am spending this time with the Mother of God and preparing myself 
for the solemn moment of the coming of the Lord Jesus. The Mother of God is instructing me 
in the interior life of the soul with J esus, especially in Holy Communion. It is only in eternity 
that we shall know the great mystery effected in us by Holy Communion. 0 most precious 
moments of my life! 

841 0 my Creator, I long for You! You understand me, 0 Lord of mine! All that is on earth seems 
to me like a pale shadow. It is You I long for and desire. Although You do so inconceivably 
much for me, for You yourself visit me in a special way, yet those visits do not soothe the 
wound of the heart, but make me long all the more for You, O Lord. Oh, take me to Yourself, 
Lord, if such is Your will! You know that I am dying, and I am dying of longing for You; and 
yet, I cannot die. Death, where are you? You draw me into the abyss of Your divinity, and 
You veil yourself with darkness. My whole being is immersed in You, yet I desire to see You 
face to face. When will this come about for me? 

842 Sister Chrysostom r i54i came to visit me today. She brought some lemons and apples and a 
tiny Christmas tree. I was delighted with them. Through Sister Chrysostom, Mother Superior 
asked the doctor [Adam Silberg] to let me come home for Christmas, and he readily agreed. 

I was very happy and burst into tears like a little child. Sister Chrysostom was surprised that 
I looked so bad and had changed so much, and she told me, "You know, Little Faustina, 
probably you will die. You must be suffering a great deal, Sister." I answered that I was 
suffering more that day than on other days, but that it was nothing and that, for the 
salvation of souls, it was not too much. 0 merciful Jesus, give me the souls of sinners! 

843 December 24, [1936]. During Holy Mass today, I was united in a particular way with God and 
His I mmaculate Mother. The humility and love of the I mmaculate Virgin penetrated my soul. 
The more I imitate the Mother of God, the more deeply I get to know God. Oh, what infinite 
longing envelops my soul! Jesus, how can You still leave me in this exile? I am dying of 
longing for You. Every touch of my soul by You wounds me immensely. Love and suffering go 
together; yet I would not exchange this pain caused by You for any treasure, because it is

the pain of incomprehensible delights, and these wounds of the soul are inflicted by a loving 
hand. 

844 Sister C. ussi came in the afternoon and took me home for the holydays. I was happy to be 
reunited with the community. As we were riding through the city [Cracow], I imagined it was 
the town of Bethlehem. As I watched all those people hurrying about, I thought: who is 
meditating today, in recollection and silence, on this inconceivable mystery? 0 pure Virgin, 
You are traveling today, and so am I . I feel that today's journey has its symbolism. 0 radiant 
Virgin, pure as crystal, all immersed in God, I offer You my spiritual life; arrange everything 
that it may be pleasing to Your Son. 0 my Mother, how ardently I desire that You give me 
the I nfant J esus during the Midnight Mass. And I felt such a living presence of God in the 
depths of my soul, that it was only by sheer will-power that I restrained my joy in order not 
to show outwardly what was going on in my soul. 


845 Before the vigil supper, I entered the chapel for a moment to break the wafer spiritually with 
those dear to my heart. I presented them all, by name, to Jesus and begged for graces on 
their behalf. But that wasn't all. I commended to the Lord all those who are being 
persecuted, those who are suffering, those who do not know His Name, and especially poor 
sinners. 0 little J esus, I fervently ask You, enclose them all in the ocean of Your 
incomprehensible mercy. O sweet little Jesus, here is my heart; let it be a little cozy dwelling 
place for Yourself. O Infinite Majesty, with what sweetness You drew close to us. Here, there 
is no dread of the thunderbolts of the great J ehovah; here, there is the sweet little J esus. 
Here, no soul is afraid, although Your majesty has not lessened, but only concealed itself. 
After supper, I felt very tired and was in pain. I had to lie down. But I kept vigil with the Most 
Holy Mother, awaiting the arrival of the little Child. 

846 December 25, [1936]. Midnight Mass. During Mass, God's presence pierced me through and 
through. A moment before the Elevation I saw the Mother of God and the I nfant J esus and 
the good Old Man [St. Joseph]. The Most Holy Mother spoke these words to me: My 
daughter, Faustina, take this most precious Treasure, and she gave me the Infant Jesus. 
When I took J esus in my arms, my soul felt such unspeakable joy that I am unable to 
describe it. But, strange thing, after a short while Jesus became awful, horrible-looking, 
grown up and suffering; and then the vision vanished, and soon it was time to go to Holy 
Communion. When I received the Lord J esus in Holy Communion, my soul trembled under 
the influence of God's presence. The next day, I saw the Divine Infant for a brief moment 
during the Elevation. 

847 On the second day of the Feast, Father Andrasz came to celebrate Mass for us, and during 
Mass I again saw the little J esus. I n the afternoon, I went to confession. Father did not give 
an answer to some of my questions that concerned this work. He said, "When you recover, 
we shall talk about it in concrete terms; and now, try to recover completely. As for the rest, 
you know what guidance to follow and what direction to take in these matters." As penance, 
Father told me to say the chaplet that J esus had taught me. 

848 While I was saying the chaplet, I heard a voice which said, Oh, what great graces I will 
grant to souls who say this chaplet; the very depths of My tender mercy are stirred 
for the sake of those who say the chaplet. Write down these words. My daughter. 
Speak to the world about My mercy; let all mankind recognize My unfathomable 
mercy. It is a sign for the end times; after it will come the day of justice. While 
there is still time, let them have recourse to the fount of My mercy; let them profit 
from the Blood and Water which gushed forth for them. 

0 human souls, where are you going to hide on the day of God's anger? Take refuge now in 
the fount of God's mercy. 0 what a great multitude of souls I see! They worshiped the Divine 
Mercy and will be singing the hymn of praise for all eternity. 



849 December 27. Today, I returned to my place of solitude [her private room at the 

sanatorium]. I had a pleasant trip as I travelled with a certain person ri56i who was taking her 
baby to be baptized. We gave her a lift as far as the Church in Podgorze. r 1571 In order to get

out, she put the baby in my arms. When I took it, I offered it, with an ardent prayer, to God 
so that some day it might give Him special glory. I felt in my soul that the Lord was looking 
in a special way on that little soul. When we arrived on Pradnik, Sister N. rissi helped me to 
carry my bundle. When we entered my room, we saw a beautiful paper angel with the 
inscription, "Gloria in I think it is from the sick sister to whom I sent the Christmas tree. 

[159] 

850 And so, the holydays are over. Nothing can still the yearning of my soul. I long for You, 0 my 
Creator and eternal God! Neither celebrations nor beautiful hymns soothe my soul; rather, 
they make me yearn all the more. At the very mention of Your Name, my spirit springs 
toward You, O Lord. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 20 1-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-521 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1 001-1050 t 1051-1 .00 t 1101-1150 t 1 151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-1321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 2 


851 December 28, [1936]. Today I have started a novena to The Divine Mercy. That is, I place 
myself in spirit before the image and recite the chaplet which the Lord has taught me. On 
the second day of the novena, I saw the image, as it were, come alive, adorned with 
numberless votive lamps, and I saw great crowds of people coming there, and many of 
them were filled with happiness. O J esus, with what great joy did my heart beat! I am 
making the novena for the intention of two people; namely, the Archbishop [J albrzykowski] 
and Father Sopocko. I am earnestly asking the Lord to inspire the Archbishop to approve the 
chaplet, which is so pleasing to God, and also the image, and that he may not put off or 
delay this work.... 

852 Today the Lord's gaze shot through me suddenly, like lightning. At once, I came to know the 
tiniest specks in my soul, and knowing the depths of my misery, I fell to my knees and 
begged the Lord's pardon, and with great trust I immersed myself in His infinite mercy. 

Such knowledge does not depress me nor keep me away from the Lord, but rather it 
arouses in my soul greater love and boundless trust. The repentance of my heart is linked to 
love. These extraordinary flashes from the Lord educate my soul. O sweet rays of God, 
enlighten me to the most secret depth, for I want to arrive at the greatest possible purity of 
heart and soul. 

853 I n the evening, a great longing took possession of my soul. I took the pamphlet with the 

I mage of the Merciful J esus on it and pressed it to my heart, and the following words burst 
forth from my soul: "Jesus, Eternal Love, I live for You, I die for You, and I want to become 
united with You." Suddenly I saw the Lord in His inexpressible beauty. He looked at me 
graciously and said, My daughter, I too came down from heaven out of love for you; I 
lived for you, I died for you, and I created the heavens for you. And J esus pressed 
me to His Heart and said to me, Very soon now; be at peace. My daughter. When I was 
alone, my soul was set afire with the desire to suffer until the moment when the Lord would 
say, "Enough." And even if I were to live for thousands of years, I see in the light of God 
that that is but one moment. Souls ...[unfinished thought]. 

854 December 29, [1936]. Today after Holy Communion, I heard a voice in my soul: My 
daughter, stand ready, for I will come unexpectedly. Jesus, You do not want to tell me 
the hour I am looking forward to with such longing? My daughter, it is for your own 
good. You will learn it, but not now; keep watch. 0 J esus, do with me as You please. I 
know You are the merciful Savior and You will not change towards me at the hour of my 
death. If at this time you are showing me so much special love, and are condescending to 
unite Yourself with me is such an intimate way and with such great kindness, I expect even

more at the hour of my death. You, my Lord-God, cannot change. You are always the same. 
Heaven can change, as well as everything that is created; but You, Lord, are ever the same 
and will endure forever. So come as You like and when You like. Father of infinite mercy, I, 
Your child, wait longingly for Your coming. 0 Jesus, You said in the Holy Gospel, "Out of 
your mouth do I judge you." Well, Jesus, I am always speaking of Your inconceivable mercy, 
so I trust that You will judge me according to Your unfathomable mercy. 



855 December 30, 1936. The year is coming to an end. I took today as the day of the monthly 
retreat. My spirit engrossed itself in the benefits that God has lavished on me throughout 
this whole year. My soul trembled at the sight of this immensity of God's graces. From my 
soul there burst forth a hymn of thanksgiving to the Lord. For a whole hour, I remained 
steeped in adoration and thanksgiving, contemplating, one by one, the benefits I had 
received from God and also my own minor shortcomings. All that this year contained has 
gone into the abyss of eternity. Nothing is lost. I am glad that nothing gets lost. 

December 30, [1936]. One-day retreat. 

856 During the morning meditation, I felt an aversion and a repugnance for all created things. 
Everything pales before my eyes; my spirit is detached from all things. I desire only God 
himself, and yet I must live. This is a martyrdom beyond description. God imparts himself to 
the soul in a loving way and draws it into the infinite depths of His divinity, but at the same 
time He leaves it here on earth for the sole purpose that it might suffer and die of longing 
for Him. And this strong love is so pure that God himself finds pleasure in it; and self-love 
has no access to its deeds, for here everything is totally saturated with bitterness, and thus 
is totally pure. Life is a continuous dying, painful and terrible, and at the same time it is the 
depth of true life and of inconceivable happiness and the strength of the soul; and because 
of this, [the soul] is capable of great deeds for the sake of God. 

857 + In the evening, I prayed for a few hours, first for my parents and relatives, for Mother 
General and for the whole Congregation, for our students, and for three priests [probably 
Archbishop J albrzykowski, Father Sopocko, and Father Andrasz] to whom I owe very much. 

I ran the length and breadth of the whole world and thanked the unfathomable mercy of 
God for all the graces granted to people, and I begged pardon for everything by which they 
have offended Him. 

858 During Vespers, I saw the Lord Jesus, who looked sweetly and profoundly into my soul. My 
daughter, have patience; it won't be long now. That profound look and those words 
filled my soul with strength and power, courage and extraordinary trust that I would carry 
out everything He was demanding of me, despite such tremendous difficulties, and [filled 
me with] a special conviction that the Lord is with me and that with Him I can do all things. 
All the powers on earth and in hell are as nothing to me. Everything must fall before the 
power of His Name. I entrust everything into Your hands, O my Lord and God. Sole 
Commander of my soul, direct me according to Your eternal desires. 


+ 



859 J.M.J. Cracow, Pradnik, J anuary 1, 1937. 


J esus, I trust in You. 

+ Today, at midnight, I bid good-bye to the old year 1936, and welcomed the year 1937. It 
was with fear and trembling that, in this first hour of the year, I faced this new period of 
time. Merciful Jesus, with You I go boldly and courageously into conflicts and battles. In Your 
Name, I will accomplish everything and overcome everything. My God, Infinite Goodness, I 
beg of You, let Your infinite mercy accompany me always and in all things. 

As I enter this year, fear of life overwhelms me, but J esus brings me out of this fear and lets 
me know what great glory this work of mercy will bring Him. 

860 There are times in life when the soul finds comfort only in profound prayer. Would that souls 
knew how to persevere in prayer at such times. This is very important. 

+ J .M.J . J esus, I trust in You. 

+ Resolutions for the year 1937, day 1, month 1. 

861 Particular examen: remains the same; namely, to unite myself with the Merciful Christ (that 
is; what would Christ do in such and such a case?) and, in spirit, to embrace the whole 
world, especially Russia and Spain. 

General resolutions.

I. Strict observance of silence - interior silence. 

II. To see the image of God in every sister; all love of neighbor must flow from this motive. 

I I I . To do the will of God faithfully at every moment of my life and to live by this. 

IV. To give a faithful account of everything to the spiritual director and not to undertake 
anything of importance without a clear understanding with him. I shall try to clearly lay bare 
to him the most secret depths of my soul, bearing in mind that I am dealing with God 
himself, and that His representative is just a human being, and so I must pray daily that he 
be given light. 

V. During the evening examination of conscience, I am to ask myself the question: What if He 
were to call me today? 

VI. Not to look for God far away, but within my own being to abide with Him alone. 

VII. In sufferings and torments, to take refuge in the tabernacle and to be silent. 

VI 1 1 . To join all sufferings, prayers, works and mortifications to the merits of J esus in order to 
obtain mercy for the world. 

IX. To use free moments, however short, for prayers for the dying. 

X. There must not be a day in my life when I do not recommend to the Lord the works of our 
Congregation. Never have regard for what others think of you [for human respect]. 

XI . Have no familiar relationships with anyone. Gentle firmness toward the girls, boundless 
patience; punish them severely but with such punishments as these: prayer and self- 
sacrifice. The strength that is in the emptying of myself for their sake is for them a [source 
of] constant remorse and the softening of their obdurate hearts. 

XII. The presence of God is the basis of all my thoughts, words and deeds. 



XI 1 1 . To take advantage of all spiritual help. To always put self-love in its proper place; namely, 
the last. To perform my spiritual exercises as though I were doing them for the last time in 
my life, and in like manner to carry out all my duties. 

862 January 2, [1937]. The Name of Jesus. Oh, how great is Your Name, 0 Lord! It is the 
strength of my soul. When my strength fails, and darkness invades my soul, Your Name is 
the sun whose rays give light and also warmth, and under their influence the soul becomes 
more beautiful and radiant, taking its splendor from Your Name. When I hear the sweetest 
name of Jesus, my heartbeat grows stronger, and there are times when, hearing the Name 
of Jesus, I fall into a swoon. My spirit eagerly strains toward Him. 

863 This is a particularly important day for me. On this day I made my first visit connected with 
the painting of the I mage. ri6oi On this day the Divine Mercy received special external honor 
for the first time, although it has been known for a long time, but here it was in the form 
that the Lord had requested. This day of the sweet Name of J esus reminds me of many 
special graces. 

864 January 3. The Mother Superior of the Congregation that serves this hospital visited me 
today, together with one of her sisters, rmi For a long while, we talked about spiritual 
matters. I recognized in her a great ascetic, and so our conversation was pleasing to God. 

Today a girl came to see me. I saw that she was suffering, but not so much in body as in 
soul. I comforted her as much as I could, but my words of consolation were not enough. She 
was a poor orphan with a soul plunged in bitterness and pain. She opened her soul to me 
and told me everything. I understood that, in this case, simple words of consolation would 
not be enough. I fervently interceded with the Lord for that soul and offered Him my joy so 
that He would give it to her and take all feeling of joy away from me. And the Lord heard my 
prayer: I was left only with the consolation that she had been consoled. 

865 Adoration. First Sunday of the month. During adoration, I felt so strongly urged to act that I 
burst into tears and said to the Lord, "Jesus, do not urge me, but give this inspiration to 
those who You know are delaying the work." And I heard these words: My daughter, be at 
peace; it will not be long now. 

866 During Vespers, I heard these words: My daughter, I want to repose in your heart, 
because many souls have thrown Me out of their hearts today. I have experienced 
sorrow unto death. I tried to comfort the Lord, by offering Him my love a thousand times 
over. I felt, within my soul, a great disgust for sin.

867 + My heart is steeped in continual bitterness, because I want to go to You, Lord, into the 
fullness of life. 0 Jesus, what a dreadful wilderness this life seems to me! There is on this 
earth no nourishment for either my heart or my soul. I suffer because of my longing for You, 
0 Lord. You have left me the Sacred Host, 0 Lord, but it enkindles in my soul an even 
greater longing for You, 0 my Creator and Eternal God! Jesus, I yearn to become united 
with You. Deign to hear the sighs of Your dearly beloved. Oh, how I suffer because I am still 
unable to be united with You. But let it be done according to Your wishes. 

868 January 5, 1937. This evening, I saw a certain priest [probably Father Sopocko] who was in 
need of prayer for a certain matter. I prayed fervently because the matter is very close to 
my heart as well. Thank You, Jesus, for this kindness. 


869 0 Jesus, have mercy! Embrace the whole world and press me to Your Heart.... O Lord, let 
my soul repose in the sea of Your unfathomable mercy. 

870 January 6, 1937. Today during Holy Mass, I was unwittingly absorbed in the infinite majesty 
of God. The whole immensity of God's love flooded my soul. At that particular moment, I 
became aware of how much God abases himself for my sake. He, the Lord of Lords-and 
what am I, miserable being that I am, that You would commune thus with me? The wonder 
that took hold of me after this special grace continued very vividly throughout the entire 
day. Taking advantage of the intimacy to which the Lord was admitting me, I interceded 
before Him for the whole world. At such moments I have the feeling that the whole world is 
depending on me. 

871 + My Master, cause my heart never to expect help from anyone, but I will always strive to 
bring assistance, consolation and all manner of relief to others. My heart is always open to 
the sufferings of others; and I will not close my heart to the sufferings of others, even 
though because of this I have been scornfully nicknamed "dump"; that is, [because] 
everyone dumps his pain into my heart. [To this] I answered that everyone has a place in 
my heart and I, in return, have a place in the Heart of Jesus. Taunts regarding the law of 
love will not narrow my heart. My soul is always sensitive on this point, and J esus alone is 
the motive for my love of neighbor. 

872 January 7. During the Holy Hour, the Lord allowed me to taste His Passion. I shared in the 
bitterness of the suffering that filled His soul to overflowing. Jesus gave me to understand 
how a soul should be faithful to prayer despite torments, dryness and temptations; because 
oftentimes the realization of God's great plans depends mainly on such prayer. If we do not 
persevere in such prayer, we frustrate what the Lord wanted to do through us or within us. 
Let every soul remember these words: "And being in anguish, He prayed longer." I always 
prolong such prayer as much as is in my power and in conformity with my duty. 

873 January 8. On Friday morning, as I was going to the chapel to attend Holy Mass, I suddenly 
saw a huge juniper tree on the pavement and in it a horrible cat who, looking angrily at me, 
blocked my way to the chapel. One whisper of the name of J esus dissipated all that. I 
offered the whole day for dying sinners. During Holy Mass, I felt the closeness of the Lord in 
a special way. After Holy Communion, I turned my gaze with trust toward the Lord and told 
him, "Jesus, I so much desire to tell You something." And the Lord looked at me with love 
and said, And what is it that you desire to tell Me? 

"Jesus, I beg You, by the inconceivable power of Your mercy, that all the souls who will die 
today escape the fire of hell, even if they have been the greatest sinners. Today is Friday, 
the memorial of Your bitter agony on the Cross; because Your mercy is inconceivable, the 
Angels will not be surprised at this." Jesus pressed me to His Heart and said, My beloved 
daughter, you have come to know well the depths of My mercy. I will do what you 
ask, but unite yourself continually with My agonizing Heart and make reparation to 
My justice. Know that you have asked Me for a great thing, but I see that this was 
dictated by your pure love for Me; that is why I am complying with your requests. 

874 Mary, I mmaculate Virgin, take me under Your special protection and guard the purity of my 
soul, heart and body. You are the model and star of my life.

875 Today, I experienced a great suffering during the visit of our sisters. I learned of something 
that hurt me terribly, but I controlled myself so that the sisters didn't notice anything. For 
some time, the pain was tearing my heart apart, but all that is for the sake of poor 
sinners. . . . 0 J esus, for poor sinners . ... \ esus, my strength, stay close to me, help me. . . . 

876 January 10, 1937. I asked the Lord today to give me strength in the morning so that I could 
go to receive Holy Communion. My Master, I ask You with all my thirsting heart to give me, 
if this is according to Your holy will, any suffering and weakness that You like-l want to 
suffer all day and all night- but please, I fervently beg You, strengthen me for the one 
moment when I am to receive Holy Communion. You see very well, Jesus, that here they do 
not bring Holy Communion to the sick; so, if You do not strengthen me for that moment so 
that I can go down to the chapel, how can I receive You in the Mystery of Love? And You 
know how much my heart longs for You. O my sweet Spouse, what's the good of all these 
reasonings? You know how ardently I desire You, and if You so choose You can do this for 
me. 

On the following morning, I felt