 sister came again and said, "O Sister, the Lord J esus has given me

the grace, but now I am of a different mind. Please pray so that things will somehow be 
different again." I answered, "Yes, I will pray, but that God's will be done in you, Sister, and 
not what you want." 

1526 Most Merciful Heart of J esus, protect us from the just anger of God. 



1527 + A certain sister is constantly persecuting me for the sole reason that God communes with 
me so intimately, and she thinks that this is all pretense on my part. When, she thinks that 

I have done something amiss she says, "Some people have revelations, but commit such 
faults!" She has said this to all the sisters and always in a derogatory sense, in order to 
make me out as some sort of an oddity. One day, it caused me much pain to think that this 
insignificant drop which is the human brain can so easily scrutinize the gifts of God. After 
Holy Communion, I prayed that the Lord would enlighten her, but nevertheless I learned 
that this soul will not attain perfection if she does not change her interior dispositions. 

1528 + When I complained to the Lord Jesus about a certain person [saying], "Jesus, how can 
this person pass judgment like that, even about an intention?" the Lord answered, Do not 

be surprised. That soul does not even know her own self, so how could she pass a 
fair judgment on another soul? 

1529 Today I saw Father Andrasz at prayer. I also knew that he was interceding with the Lord for 
me. The Lord sometimes makes known to me who is praying for me. 

1530 I am keeping myself a bit in the background, as though this work of God did not interest 
me. I am not speaking about it at present, but my whole soul is steeped in prayer, and I am 
entreating God to be so good as to hasten this great gift; that is to say, the Feast of Mercy. 
And I see that J esus is acting, and is Himself giving the directives as to how this is to be 
carried out. Nothing happens by accident. 

1531 Today I said to the Lord J esus, "Do You see how many difficulties there are [to be 
overcome] before they will believe that You yourself are the author of this work? And even 
now, not everyone believes in it." Be at peace. My child; nothing can oppose My will. 

I n spite of the murmuring and hostility of the sisters. My will shall be done in you 
in all its fullness, down to the last detail of My wishes and My designs. Do not 
become sad about this; I too was a stumbling stone for some souls. 

1532 + Jesus complained to me of how painful to Him is the unfaithfulness of chosen souls, and 

My heart is even more wounded by their distrust after a fall. It would be less 
painful if they had not experienced the goodness of My heart. 

1533 I saw the anger of God hanging heavy over Poland. And now I see that if God were to visit 
our country with the greatest chastisements, that would still be great mercy because, for 
such grave transgressions, He could punish us with eternal annihilation. I was paralyzed 
with fear when the Lord lifted the veil a little for me. Now I see clearly that chosen souls 
keep the world in existence to fulfill the measure [of justice]. 

1534 + I saw a certain priest's efforts in prayer. His prayer is similar to that of the Lord Jesus in 
the Garden of Olives. Oh, if that priest [probably Father Sopocko] only knew how pleasing 
to God that prayer was! 

1535 0 Jesus, I am locking myself in Your most merciful heart as in a fortress, impregnable 
against the missiles of my enemies. 



1536 Today I found myself in the presence of a certain dying person who was approaching death 
in my home neighborhood. I supported her with my prayers and, after a few moments, I 
felt for a short while pain in my hands, feet and side... 

1537 J anuary 27, 1938. During Holy Hour today, J esus complained to me about the ingratitude of 
souls: 

I n return for My blessings, I get ingratitude. I n return for My love, I get 
forgetfulness and indifference. My Heart cannot bear this. 

1538 At that moment, love for J esus was enkindled so strongly in my heart that, offering myself 
for ungrateful souls, I immersed myself completely in Him. When I came to my senses, the 
Lord allowed me to taste a little, of the ingratitude which flooded His Heart. This experience 
lasted for a short while. 

1539 Today I said to the Lord, "When will You take me to Yourself? I 've been feeling so ill, and 
I 've been waiting for Your coming with such longing!" J esus answered me, Be always

ready; I will not leave you in this exile for long. My holy will must be fulfilled in 
you. 0 Lord, if Your holy will has not yet been entirely fulfilled in me, here I am, ready for 
everything that You want, 0 Lord! O my J esus, there is only one thing which surprises me; 
namely, that You make so many secrets known to me; but that one secret-the hour of my 
death-You do not want to tell me. And the Lord answered me, Be at peace; I will let you 
know, but not just now. Ah, my Lord, I beg Your pardon for wanting to know this. You 
know very well why, because You know my yearning heart, which is eagerly going out to 
You. You know that I would not want to die even a minute before the time which You have 
appointed for me before the ages. Jesus listened with wondrous kindness to the outpourings 
of my heart. 

1540 January 28, 1938. Today the Lord said to me, My daughter, write down these words: 

All those souls who will glorify My mercy and spread its worship, encouraging 
others to trust in My mercy, will not experience terror at the hour of death. My 
mercy will shield them in that final battle... 

1541 My daughter, encourage souls to say the chaplet which I have given to you. It 
pleases Me to grant everything they ask of Me by saying the chaplet. When 
hardened sinners say it, I will fill their souls with peace, and the hour of their 
death will be a happy one. 

Write this for the benefit of distressed souls: when a soul sees and realizes the 
gravity of its sins, when the whole abyss of the misery into which it immersed 
itself is displayed before its eyes, let it not despair, but with trust let it throw itself 
into the arms of My mercy, as a child into the arms of its beloved mother. These 
souls have a right of priority to My compassionate Heart, they have first access to 
My mercy. Tell them that no soul that has called upon My mercy has been 
disappointed or brought to shame. I delight particularly in a soul which has placed 
its trust in My goodness. 

Write that when they say this chaplet in the presence of the dying, I will stand 
between My Father and the dying person, not as the just J udge but as the merciful 
Savior. 



1542 At that moment, the Lord gave me to know how jealous He is of my heart. 

Even among the sisters you will feel lonely. Know then that I want you to unite 
yourself more closely to Me. I am concerned about every beat of your heart. Every 
stirring of your love is reflected in My Heart. I thirst for your love. "Yes, 0 Jesus, but 
my heart would not be able to live without You, either; for even if the hearts of all creatures 
were offered to me, they would not satisfy the depths of my heart." 

1543 Today toward evening, the Lord said to me, Entrust yourself completely to Me at the 

hour of death, and I will present you to My Father as My bride. And now I 
recommend that you unite, in a special way, even your smallest deeds to My 
merits, and then My Father will look upon them with love as if they were My own. 

1544 Do not change your particular examen which I have given you through Father 
Andrasz; namely, that you unite yourself with Me continually. That is what I am 
clearly asking of you today. Be a child toward My representatives, because I 
borrow their lips to speak to you, so that you will have no doubts about anything. 

1545 My health has improved somewhat. I went down to the refectory and the chapel today. I 
still cannot resume my duties, and so I stay in my cell at the hand-loom [making borders 
for altar linens]. I enjoy this work very much, but still, even with such light work, I tire 
easily. I see how feeble I am. There are no indifferent moments in my life, since every 
moment of my life is filled with prayer, suffering and work. If not in one way, then in 
another, I glorify God; and if God were to give me a second life, I do not know whether I 
would make better use of it... 

1546 The Lord said to me, I am delighted with your love. Your sincere love is as pleasing 
to My Heart as the fragrance of a rosebud at morningtide, before the sun has 
taken the dew from it. The freshness of your heart captivates Me; that is why I 
unite Myself with you more closely than with any other creature... 

1547 Today I saw the efforts of this priest [Father Sopocko] concerning the affairs of God. His 
heart is beginning to taste that which filled God's Heart during His earthly life. In

recompense for his efforts- ingratitude... But he is very zealous for the glory of God... 

1548 January 30, 1938. One-day retreat. 

The Lord gave me to know, during meditation, that as long as my heart beats in my breast, 

I must always strive to spread the Kingdom of God on earth. I am to fight for the glory of 
my Creator. 

I know that I will give God the glory He expects of me if I try faithfully to cooperate with 
God's grace. 



1549 I want to live in the spirit of faith. I accept everything that comes my way as given me by 
the loving will of God, who sincerely desires my happiness. And so I will accept with 
submission and gratitude everything that God sends me. I will pay no attention to the voice 
of nature and to the promptings of self-love. Before each important action, I will stop to 
consider for a moment what relationship it has to eternal life and what may be the main 
reason for my undertaking it: is it for the glory of God, or for the good of my own soul, or 
for the good of the souls of others? If my heart says yes, then I will not swerve from 
carrying out the given action, unmindful of either obstacles or sacrifices. I will not be 
frightened into abandoning my intention. It is enough for me to know that it is pleasing to 
God. On the other hand, if I learn that the action has nothing in common with what I have 
just mentioned, I will try to elevate it to a loftier sphere by means of a good intention. And 
if I learn that something flows from my self-love, I will cancel it out right from the start. 

1550 In cases of doubt, I will not act, but will scrupulously seek clarifications from the priests, 
and in particular from my spiritual director. I will not give explanations on my own behalf 
when someone reproaches me or criticizes me, unless I am directly asked to bear witness to 
the truth. With great patience, I will listen when others open their hearts to me, accept their 
sufferings, give them spiritual comfort, but drown my own sufferings in the most merciful 
Heart of Jesus. I will never leave the depths of His mercy, while bringing the whole world 
into those depths. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101- 150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-52] 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1 001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1 201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-1321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 5 


1551 In the meditation on death, I asked the Lord to deign to fill my heart with those sentiments 
which I will have at the moment of my death. And through God's grace I received an 
interior reply that I had done what was within my power and so could be at peace. At that 
moment, such profound gratitude to God was awakened in my soul that I burst into tears of 
joy like a little child. I prepared to receive Holy Communion next morning as "viaticum," 
and I said the prayers of the dying 233 for my own intention. 

1552 Then I heard the words: As you are united with Me in life, so will you be united at 
the moment of death. After these words, such great trust in God's great mercy was 
awakened in my soul that, even if I had had the sins of the whole world, as well as the sins 
of all the condemned souls weighing on my conscience, I would not have doubted God's 
goodness but, without hesitation, would have thrown myself into the abyss of the divine 
mercy, which is always open to us; and, with a heart crushed to dust, I would have cast 
myself at His feet, abandoning myself totally to His holy will, which is mercy itself. 

1553 0 my J esus, Life of my soul, my Life, my Savior, my sweetest Bridegroom, and at the same 
time my J udge, You know that in this last hour of mine I do not count on any merits of my 
own, but only on Your mercy. Even as of today, I immerse myself totally in the abyss of 
Your mercy, which is always open to every soul.

0 my J esus, I have only one task to carry out in my lifetime, in death, and throughout 
eternity, and that is to adore Your incomprehensible mercy. No mind, either of angel or of 
man, will ever fathom the mysteries of Your mercy, O God. The angels are lost in 
amazement before the mystery of divine mercy, but cannot comprehend it. Everything that 
has come from the Creator's hand is contained in this inconceivable mystery; that is to say, 
in the very depths of His tender mercy. When I meditate on this, my spirit swoons, and my 
heart dissolves in joy. 0 Jesus, it is through Your most compassionate Heart, as through a 
crystal, that the rays of divine mercy have come to us. 

1554 February 1, [1938]. Today I am feeling a little worse, physically, but I am still taking part in 
the common life [prayers, meals, and recreation]. I am making great efforts, known to You 
alone, J esus. I n the refectory today, I did not think I would last until the end of the meal. 
Every mouthful causes me extreme pain. 


1555 When Mother S. [Irene] visited me a week ago, she said, "You catch every sickness, Sister, 
because your system is so weak, but that is not your fault. In fact, if any other sister had 
that same sickness, she would certainly be walking around; whereas you, Sister, must stay 
in bed!! These words did not hurt me, but it is better not to make such comparisons with 
very sick persons, because their cup is full enough as it is. Another thing: when sisters visit 
the sick, they should not ask in detail every time, "What is hurting you, and how does it 
hurt?" because it is very tiresome to keep telling each sister the same thing about oneself. 
And it sometimes happens that one must repeat the same thing over and over many times 
a day. 

1556 When I had gone to the chapel for a moment, the Lord gave me to know that, among His 
chosen ones, there are some who are especially chosen, and whom He calls to a higher 
form of holiness, to exceptional union with Him. These are seraphic souls, from whom God 
demands greater love than He does from others. Although all live in the same convent, yet 
He sometimes demands of a particular soul a greater degree of love. Such a soul 
understands this call, because God makes this known to it interiorly, but the soul may 
either follow this call or not. It depends on the soul itself whether it is faithful to these 
touches of the Holy Spirit, or whether it resists them. I have learned that there is a place in 
purgatory where souls will pay their debt to God for such transgressions; this kind of 
torment is the most difficult of all. The soul which is specially marked by God will be 
distinguished everywhere, whether in heaven or in purgatory or in hell. In heaven, it will be 
distinguished from other souls by greater glory and radiance and deeper knowledge of God. 
In purgatory, by greater pain, because it knows God more profoundly and desires Him more 
vehemently. In hell, it will suffer more profoundly than other souls, because it knows more 
fully whom it has lost. This indelible mark of God's exclusive love, in the [soul], will not be 
obliterated. 

1557 O J esus, keep me in holy fear, so that I may not waste graces. Help me to be faithful to the 
inspirations of the Holy Spirit. Grant that my heart may burst for love of You, rather than I 
should neglect even one act of love for You. 

1558 February 2, [ 1938]. Darkness of the soul. Today is the Feast of the Mother of God, and in 
my soul it is so dark. The Lord has hidden Himself, and I am alone, all alone. My mind has 
become so dimmed that I see only phantasies about me. Not a single ray of light penetrates 
my soul. I do not understand myself or those who speak to me. Frightful temptations 
regarding the holy faith assail me. 0 my Jesus, save me. I cannot say anything more. I 
cannot describe these things in detail, for I fear lest someone be scandalized on reading 
this. I am astounded that such torments could befall a soul. O hurricane, what are you 
doing to the boat of my heart? This storm has lasted the whole day and night. 

When Mother Superior [Irene] came in to see me and asked, "Would you like to take 
advantage of this occasion, Sister, since Father An. [Andrasz] is coming to hear 
confessions?" I answered, no. It seemed to me that Father would not understand me, nor 
would I be able to make a confession. 

I spent the whole night with Jesus in Gethsemane. From my breast there escaped one

continuous moan. A natural dying will be much easier, because then one is in agony and will 
die; while here, one is in agony, but cannot die. 0 Jesus, I never thought such suffering 
could exist. Nothingness: that is the reality. 0 Jesus, save me! I believe in You with all my 
heart. So many times have I seen the radiance of Your face, and now, where are You, 
Lord?... I believe, I believe, and again I believe in You, Triune God, Father, Son and Holy 



Spirit, and in all the truths which Your holy Church gives me to believe... But the darkness 
does not recede, and my spirit plunges into even greater agony. And at that moment, such 
terrible torment overwhelmed me that now I am amazed at myself that I did not breathe 
my last, but this was for only a brief instant. 

1559 At that moment I saw J esus, and from His Heart there issued those same two rays, which 
enveloped me, whole and entire. At the same moment, all my torments vanished. My 

daughter, the Lord said, know that of yourself you are just what you have gone 
through, and it is only by My grace that you are a participant of eternal life and all 
the gifts I lavish on you. And with these words of the Lord, there came to me a true 
knowledge of myself. Jesus is giving me a lesson in deep humility and, at the same time, 
one of total trust in Him. My heart is reduced to dust and ashes, and even if all people were 
to trample me under their feet, I would still consider that a favor. 

I feel and am, in fact, very deeply permeated with the knowledge that I am nothing, so that 
real humiliations will be a refreshment for me. 

1560 February 3, [1938]. Today after Holy Communion, Jesus again gave me a few directives: 

First, do not fight against a temptation by yourself, but disclose it to the confessor 
at once, and then the temptation will lose all its force. Second, during these 
ordeals do not lose your peace; live in My presence; ask My Mother and the Saints 
for help. Third, have the certitude that I am looking at you and supporting you. 
Fourth, do not fear either struggles of the soul or any temptations, because I am 
supporting you; if only you are willing to fight, know that the victory is always on 
your side. Fifth, know that by fighting bravely you give Me great glory and amass 
merits for yourself. Temptation gives you a chance to show Me your fidelity. 

1561 And now I am going to tell you something that is most important for you: 
boundless sincerity with your spiritual director. If you do not take advantage of 
this great grace according to My instructions, I will take him away from you, and 
then you will be left to yourself; and all the torments, which you know very well, 
will return to you. It displeases Me that you do not take advantage of the 
opportunity when you are able to see him and talk with him. Know that it is a 
great grace on My part when I give a spiritual director to a soul. Many souls ask 
Me for this, but it is not to all that I grant this grace. From the moment when I 
gave you this priest as spiritual director, I endowed him with new light so that he 
might easily know and understand your soul... 

1562 O my J esus, my only mercy, allow me to see contentment in Your face as a sign of 
reconciliation with me, because my heart cannot bear Your seriousness; if this continues a 
moment longer my heart will burst with grief. You see that I am even now crushed to dust. 

1563 And at that very moment I saw myself in some kind of a palace; and Jesus gave me His 
hand, sat me at His side, and said with kindness, My bride, you always please Me by 
your humility. The greatest misery does not stop Me from uniting Myself to a soul, 
but where there is pride, I am not there. 

When I came to myself, I reflected on what had happened in my heart, thanking God for His 
love and for the mercy that He had shown me. 



1564 J esus, hide me; just as You have hidden Yourself under the form of the white Host, so hide 
me from human eyes, and particularly hide the gifts which You so kindly grant me. May I 
not betray outwardly what You are effecting in my soul. I am a white host before You, O 
Divine Priest. Consecrate me Yourself, and may my transubstantiation be known only to 
You. I stand before You each day as a sacrificial host and implore Your mercy upon the 
world. In silence, and unseen, I will empty myself before You; my pure and undivided love

will burn, in profound silence, as a holocaust. And may the fragrance of my love be wafted 
to the foot of Your throne. You are the Lord of lords, but You delight in innocent and humble 
souls. 

1565 When I entered the chapel for a moment, the Lord said to me, My daughter, help Me to 
save a certain dying sinner. Say the chaplet that I have taught you for him. When I 
began to say the chaplet, I saw the man dying in the midst of terrible torment and struggle. 
His Guardian Angel was defending him, but he was, as it were, powerless against the 
enormity of the soul's misery. A multitude of devils was waiting for the soul. But while I was 
saying the chaplet, I saw J esus just as He is depicted in the image. The rays which issued 
from j esus' Heart enveloped the sick man, and the powers of darkness fled in panic. The 
sick man peacefully breathed his last. When I came to myself, I understood how very 
important the chaplet was for the dying. It appeases the anger of God. 

1566 When I was apologizing to the Lord J esus for a certain action of mine which, a little later, 
turned out to be imperfect, Jesus put me at ease with these words: My daughter, I 
reward you for the purity of your intention which you had at the time when you 
acted. My Heart rejoiced that you had My love under consideration at the time you 
acted, and that in so distinct a way; and even now you still derive benefit from 
this; that is, from the humiliation. Yes, My child, I want you to always have such 
great purity of intention in the very least things you undertake. 

1567 As I took the pen in hand, I addressed a short prayer to the Holy Spirit and said, "Jesus, 
bless this pen so that everything You order me to write may be for the glory of God." Then I 
heard a voice: Yes, I bless [it], because this writing bears the seal of obedience to 
your superior and confessor, and by that very fact I am already given glory, and 
many souls will be drawing profit from it. My daughter, I demand that you devote 
all your free moments to writing about My goodness and mercy. It is your office 
and your assignment throughout your life to continue to make known to souls the 
great mercy I have for them and to exhort them to trust in My bottomless mercy. 

1568 O my J esus, I believe in Your words and no longer have any doubt about this because in the 
course of one conversation with Mother Superior [Irene], she told me to write more about 
Your mercy. That statement was very much in accord with Your request. O my Jesus, I now 
understand that if You demand something from a soul, You also inspire the superiors to 
allow us to fulfill Your demands, even though it sometimes happens that we do not receive 
permission at once, and our patience is often put to the test... 



1569 + 0 Everlasting Love, Jesus, who have enclosed Yourself in the Host, 

And therein hide Your divinity and conceal Your beauty, 

You do this in order to give Yourself, whole and entire, to my soul 
And in order not to terrify it with Your greatness. 

0 Everlasting Love, Jesus, who have shrouded Yourself with bread, 

Eternal Light, incomprehensible Fountain of joy and happiness, 

Because You want to be heaven on earth to me, 

That indeed You are, when Your love, O God, imparts itself to me. 

1570 0 Greatly Merciful God, Infinite Goodness, today all mankind calls out from the abyss of its 
misery to Your mercy-to Your compassion, 0 God; and it is with its mighty voice of misery 
that it cries out. Gracious God, do not reject the prayer of this earth's exiles! 0 Lord, 
Goodness beyond our understanding, Who are acquainted with our misery through and 
through, and know that by our own power we cannot ascend to You, we implore You: 
anticipate us with Your grace and keep on increasing Your mercy in us, that we may 
faithfully do Your holy will all through our life and at death's hour. Let the omnipotence of 
Your mercy shield us from the darts of our salvation's enemies, that we may with 
confidence, as Your children, await Your final coming-that day known to You alone. And we 
expect to obtain everything promised us by J esus in spite of all our wretchedness. For J esus 
is our Hope: Through His merciful Heart, as through an open gate, we pass through to 
heaven. 

1571 I have noticed that, from the very moment I entered the convent, I have been charged with 
one thing; namely, that I am a saint. But this word was always used scoffingly. At first, this

hurt me very much, but when I had risen above it, I paid no attention to it. However, when 
on one occasion a certain person [perhaps Father Sopocko] suffered because of my 
sanctity, I was very pained that, because of me, others can experience some 
unpleasantness. And I began to complain to the Lord Jesus, asking why this should be so, 
and the Lord answered me, Are you sad because of this? Of course you are a saint. 
Soon I Myself will make this manifest in you, and they will pronounce the same 
word, saint, only this time it will be with love. 

1572 I remind you. My daughter, that as often as you hear the clock strike the third 
hour, immerse yourself completely in My mercy, adoring and glorifying it; invoke 
its omnipotence for the whole world, and particularly for poor sinners; for at that 
moment mercy was opened wide for every soul. I n this hour you can obtain 
everything for yourself and for others for the asking; it was the hour of grace for 
the whole world-mercy triumphed over justice. 

My daughter, try your best to make the Stations of the Cross in this hour, provided 
that your duties permit it; and if you are not able to make the Stations of the 
Cross, then at least step into the chapel for a moment and adore, in the Blessed 
Sacrament, My Heart, which is full of mercy; and should you be unable to step into 
the chapel, immerse yourself in prayer there where you happen to be, if only for a 
very brief instant. I claim veneration for My mercy from every creature, but above 
all from you, since it is to you that I have given the most profound understanding 
of this mystery. 



1573 + O my God, I am overcome with great longing for You today. Oh, nothing else any longer 
occupies my heart. The earth no longer contains anything for me. 0 Jesus, how strongly I 
feel this exile, how very prolonged it is for me! 0 death, messenger of God, when will you 
announce to me that longed-for moment, through which I will be united to my God forever? 

1574 O my J esus, may the last days of my exile be spent totally according to Your most holy will. 

I unite my sufferings, my bitterness and my last agony itself to Your Sacred Passion; and I 
offer myself for the whole world to implore an abundance of God's mercy for souls, and in 
particular for the souls who are in our homes. I firmly trust and commit myself entirely to 
Your holy will, which is mercy itself. Your mercy will be everything for me at the last hour, 
as You yourself have promised me... 

1575 + Hail to You, Eternal Love, my Sweet Jesus, who have condescended to dwell in my heart! 

I salute You, 0 glorious Godhead who have deigned to stoop to me, and out of love for me 
have so emptied Yourself as to assume the insignificant form of bread. I salute You, J esus, 
never-fading flower of humanity. You are all there is for my soul. Your love is purer than a 
lily, and Your presence is more pleasing to me than the fragrance of a hyacinth. Your 
friendship is more tender and subtle than the scent of a rose, and yet it is stronger than 
death. O J esus, incomprehensible beauty, it is with pure souls that You communicate best, 
because they alone are capable of heroism and sacrifice. 0 sweet, rose-red blood of Jesus, 
ennoble my blood and change it into Your own blood, and let this be done to me according 
to Your good pleasure. 

1576 Know, My daughter, that between Me and you there is a bottomless abyss, an 
abyss which separates the Creator from the creature. But this abyss is filled with 
My mercy. I raise you up to Myself, not that I have need of you, but it is solely out 
of mercy that I grant you the grace of union with Myself. 

1577 Tell souls not to place within their own hearts obstacles to My mercy, which so 
greatly wants to act within them. My mercy works in ail those hearts which open 
their doors to it. Both the sinner and the righteous person have need of My mercy. 
Conversion, as well as perseverance, is a grace of My mercy. 

1578 Let souls who are striving for perfection particularly adore My mercy, because the 
abundance of graces which I grant them flows from My mercy. I desire that these 
souls distinguish themselves by boundless trust in My mercy. I myself will attend 
to the sanctification of such souls. I will provide them with everything they will 
need to attain sanctity. The graces of My mercy are drawn by means of one vessel 
only, and that is-trust. The more a soul trusts, the more it will receive. Souls that

trust boundlessly are a great comfort to Me, because I pour all the treasures of My 
graces into them. I rejoice that they ask for much, because it is My desire to give 
much, very much. On the other hand, I am sad when souls ask for little, when they 
narrow their hearts. 

1579 + It is when I meet with hypocrisy that I suffer most. Now I understand You, my Savior, for 
rebuking the pharisees so severly for their hypocrisy. You associated more graciously with 
hardened sinners when they approached You contritely. 



1580 My J esus, I now see that I have gone through all the stages of my life following You: 
childhood, youth, vocation, apostolic work, Tabor, Gethsemane, and now I am already with 
You on Calvary. I have willingly allowed myself to be crucified, and I am indeed already 
crucified; although I can still walk a little, I am stretched out on the cross, and I feel 
distinctly that strength is flowing to me from Your Cross, that You and You alone are my 
perseverance. Although I often hear the voice of temptation calling to me, "Come down 
from the cross!" the power of God strengthens me. Although loneliness and darkness and 
sufferings of all kinds beat against my heart, the mysterious power of God supports and 
strengthens me. I want to drink the cup to the last drop. I trust firmly that Your grace, 
which has sustained me in the Garden of Olives, will sustain me also now that I am on 
Calvary. 

1581 0 my J esus, my Master, I unite my desires to the desires that You had on the cross: I 
desire to fulfill Your holy will; I desire the conversion of souls; I desire that Your mercy be 
adored; I desire that the triumph of the Church be hastened; I desire the Feast of Mercy to 
be celebrated all over the world; I desire sanctity for priests; I desire that there be a saint 
in our Congregation; I desire that our whole Congregation have a great spirit of zeal for the 
glory of God and for the salvation of souls; I desire that souls who live in our homes do not 
offend God, but persevere in good; I desire that the blessing of God descend upon my 
parents and my whole family; I desire that God give special light to my spiritual directors, 
and in particular to Father An. and Father So.; I desire a special blessing for Superiors 2 m 
under whose direction I have been, and in particular for Mother , General [Michael], for 
Mother Irene and for the Directress of Novices, Mother [Mary] Joseph. 

1582 0 my J esus, I now embrace the whole world and ask You for mercy for it. When You tell 
me, O God, that it is enough, that Your holy will has been completely accomplished, then, 
my Savior, in union with You, I will commit my soul into the hands of the Heavenly Father, 
full of trust in Your unfathomable mercy. And when I stand at the foot of Your throne, the 
first hymn that I will sing will be one to Your mercy. Poor earth, I will not forget you. 
Although I feel that I will be immediately drowned in God as in an ocean of happiness, that 
will not be an obstacle to my returning to earth to encourage souls and incite them to trust 
in God's mercy. Indeed, this immersion in God will give me the possibility of boundless 
action. 

1583 As I write this, I hear Satan grinding his teeth. He cannot stand God's mercy, and keeps 
banging things in my cell. But I feel so much of God's power within me that it does not even 
bother me that the enemy of our salvation gets angry, and I quietly keep on writing. 

1584 0 inconceivable goodness of God, which shields us at every step, may Your mercy be 
praised without cease. That You became a brother to humans, not to angels, is a miracle of 
the unfathomable mystery of Your mercy. All our trust is in You, our first-born Brother, 

Jesus Christ, true God and true Man. My heart flutters with joy to see how good God is to us 
wretched and ungrateful people. And as a proof of His love, He gives us the 
incomprehensible gift of Himself in the person of His Son. Throughout all eternity we shall 
never exhaust that mystery of love. 0 mankind, why do you think so little about God being 
truly among us? 0 Lamb of God, I do not know what to admire in You first: Your 
gentleness, Your hidden life, the emptying of Yourself for the sake of man, or the constant 
miracle of Your mercy, which transforms souls and raises them up to eternal life. Although 
You are hidden in this way, Your omnipotence is more manifest here than in the creation of

man. Though the omnipotence of Your mercy is at work in the justification of the sinner, yet 
Your action is gentle and hidden. 


1585 A vision of the Mother of God. In the midst of a great brilliance, I saw the Mother of God 
clothed in a white gown, girt about with a golden cincture; and there were tiny stars, also of 
gold, over the whole garment, and chevron-shaped sleeves lined with gold. Her cloak was 
sky-blue, lightly thrown over the shoulders. A transparent veil was delicately drawn over 
her head, while her flowing hair was set off beautifully by a golden crown which terminated 
in little crosses. On Her left arm She held the Child J esus. A Blessed Mother of this type I 
had not yet seen. Then She looked at me kindly and said: / am the Mother of God of 
Priests. 235 At that, She lowered Jesus from Her arm to the ground, raised Her right hand 
heavenward and said: O God, bless Poland, bless priests. Then She addressed me once 
again: Tell the priests what you have seen. I resolved that at the first opportunity [I would 
have] of seeing Father [Andrasz] I would tell; but I myself can make nothing of this vision. 

1586 0 my Jesus, You see how very grateful I am to Father Sopocko, who has advanced Your 
work so much. That soul, so humble, has had to endure all the storms. He has not allowed 
himself to become discouraged by adversities, but has faithfully responded to the call of 
God. 

1587 + One of the sisters was appointed to look after the sick, but she was so negligent that one 
had to practice real mortification. One day, I made up my mind to tell the superior about it, 
but then I heard a voice in my soul: Bear it patiently; someone else will tell her. But 
the service was like that for a whole month. When I was finally able to come down to the 
refectory and to recreation, I heard these words in my soul: Now other sisters are going 
to tell about that sister's negligent service, but you are to keep silent and not 
speak about the matter. And at that point there broke out sharp criticism of the sister, 
but she could find nothing [to say] in her own defense, and all the sisters said in chorus, 
"Sister, you had better improve in your care of the sick." I have found that sometimes the 
Lord does not want us to say something on our own; He has His ways and knows when to 
speak out. 

1588 Today I heard the words: I n the Old Covenant I sent prophets wielding thunderbolts 
to My people. Today I am sending you with My mercy to the people of the whole 
world. I do not want to punish aching mankind, but I desire to heal it, pressing it 
to My Merciful Heart. I use punishment when they themselves force Me to do so; 
My hand is reluctant to take hold of the sword of justice. Before the Day of J ustice 
I am sending the Day of Mercy. I replied, "O my Jesus, speak to souls Yourself, because 
my words are insignificant." 

+ J.M.J. 

The Soul's Expectation of the Coming of the Lord. 


1589 I do not know, 0 Lord, at what hour You will come. 

And so I keep constant watch and listen 
As Your chosen bride, 

Knowing that You like to come unexpected. 

Yet, a pure heart will sense You from afar, 0 Lord. 

I wait for You, Lord, in calm and silence, 

With great longing in my heart 
And with invincible desire. 

I feel that my love for You is changing into fire, 

And that it will rise up to heaven like a flame at life's end, 
And then all my wishes will be fulfilled. 

Come then, at last, my most sweet Lord 
And take my thirsting heart 

There, to Your home in the lofty regions of heaven, 

Where Your eternal life perdures. 

Life on this earth is but an agony, 

As my heart feels it is created for the heights. 

For it the lowlands of this life hold no interest, 

For my homeland is in heaven-this I firmly believe. 

[End of Notebook Five] 


Notebook I: 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-521 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1 001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-1321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401-1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804- 828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission.

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 6 


1590 + J.M.J. 

Praise, 0 my soul, 

the incomprehensible mercy of God. 

May all be for His glory. 

Cracow, February 10, 1938. 

Sixth Notebook. 

Sister Faustina of the Blessed Sacrament 

of the Congregation of the Sisters of Our Lady of Mercy. 

1591 My heart is drawn there where my God is hidden, 

Where He dwells with us day and night, 

Clothed in the White Host; 

He governs the whole world, He communes with souls. 

My heart is drawn there where my God is hiding, 

Where His love is immolated. 

But my heart senses that the living water is here; 

It is my living God, though a veil hides Him. 

1592 February 10, 1938. During meditation, the Lord gave me knowledge of the joy of heaven 
and of the saints on our arrival there; they love God as the sole object of their love, but 
they also have a tender and heartfelt love for us. It is from the face of God that this joy 
flows out upon all, because we see Him face to face. His face is so sweet that the soul falls 
anew into ecstasy. 

1593 The Lord Himself moves me to write prayers and hymns about His mercy, and these hymns 
of praise force themselves upon my lips. I have noticed that ready formulated words of 
praise of God's mercy enter my mind, and so I have resolved to write them down in so far 
as is within my power. I can feel God urging me to do so. 

1594 One of the sisters came into my cell for a little while. After a short conversation on the 
subject of obedience, she said to me, "Oh, now I understand how the saints acted. Thank 
you, Sister; a great light has entered my soul; I have profited much." 



1595 0 my J esus, this is Your work. It is You who have spoken thus to that soul, because this 
sister came in when I was completely immersed in God, and it was just at that moment 
when this deep recollection left me. O my Jesus, I know that, in order to be useful to souls, 
one has to strive for the closest possible union with You, who are Eternal Love. One word 
from a soul united to God effects more good in souls than eloquent discussions and sermons 
from an imperfect soul. 

1596 + I saw Father A. [Andrasz's] surprise at my actions, but all that is for the glory of God. Oh, 
how great is Your grace, O Lord, grace which lifts the soul up to greater heights. I am very 
grateful to the Lord for having given me an enlightened priest. You could have continued to 
leave me in uncertainties and hesitations, but Your goodness remedied that. O my Jesus, it 
is impossible for me to count Your favors... 

1597 My daughter, your struggle will last until death. Your last breath will mark its end. 
You shall conquer by meekness. 

1598 February 13, 1938. I saw how unwillingly the Lord J esus came to certain souls in Holy 
Communion. And He spoke these words to me: I enter into certain hearts as into a 
second Passion. 

1599 As I was trying to make my Holy Hour, I saw the suffering J esus, who spoke these words to 

me: My daughter, do not pay so much attention to the vessel of grace as to the 
grace itself which I give you, because you are not always pleased with the vessel, 
and then the graces, too, become deficient. I want to guard you from that, and I 
want you never to pay attention to the vessel in which I send you My grace. Let all 
the attention of your soul be concentrated on responding to My grace as faithfully 
as possible. 

1600 + O my J esus, if You yourself do not soothe the longing - of my soul, then no one can either 
comfort or soothe it. Your every approach arouses new raptures of love in my soul, but also 
a new agony; because, despite all Your approaches to my soul, even the most exceptional, I 
am still loving You from a distance, and my heart dies in an ecstasy of love; because this is 
still not the complete and eternal union, although You commune with me so very often 
unveiled [as if face to face]; nevertheless, You thereby open in my soul and heart an abyss 
of love and desire for You, my God, and this bottomless abyss, this total desiring of God, 
cannot be completely filled on this earth. 

1601 The Lord has given me to know how much He desires the perfection of chosen souls. 

Chosen souls are, in My hand, lights which I cast into the darkness of the world 
and with which I illumine it. As stars illumine the night, so chosen souls illumine

the earth. And the more perfect a soul is, the stronger and the more far-reaching 
is the light shed by it. It can be hidden and unknown, even to those closest to it, 
and yet its holiness is reflected in souls even to the most distant extremities of the 
world. 



1602 Today the Lord said to me, Daughter, when you go to confession, to this fountain of 
My mercy, the Blood and Water which came forth from My Heart always flows 
down upon your soul and ennobles it. Every time you go to confession, immerse 
yourself entirely in My mercy, with great trust, so that I may pour the bounty of 
My grace upon your soul. When you approach the confessional, know this, that I 
Myself am waiting there for you. I am only hidden by the priest, but I myself act in 
your soul. Here the misery of the soul meets the God of mercy. Tell souls that from 
this fount of mercy souls draw graces solely with the vessel of trust. If their trust 
is great, there is no limit to My generosity. The torrents of grace inundate humble 
souls. The proud remain always in poverty and misery, because My grace turns 
away from them to humble souls. 

1603 February 14, [1938]. During adoration, I heard these words: Pray for one of the 

students who has great need of My grace. And I recognized N. I prayed hard, and 
God's mercy embraced that soul. 

1604 When, during adoration, I repeated the prayer, "Holy God" several times, a vivid presence 
of God suddenly swept over me, and I was caught up in spirit before the majesty of God. I 
saw how the Angels and the Saints of the Lord give glory to God. The glory of God is so 
great that I dare not try to describe it, because I would not be able to do so, and souls 
might think that what I have written is all there is. Saint Paul, I understand now why you 
did not want to describe heaven, but only said that eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor 
has it entered into the heart of man what God has prepared for those who love Him [cf. 1 
Cor. 2:9; 2 Cor. 12: 1-7]. Yes, that is indeed so. And all that has come forth from God 
returns to Him in the same way and gives Him perfect glory. Now I have seen the way in 
which I adore God; oh, how miserable it is! And what a tiny drop it is in comparison to that 
perfect heavenly glory. O my God, how good You are to accept my praise as well, and to 
turn Your Face to me with kindness and let us know that our prayer is pleasing to You. 

1605 Write down everything that occurs to you regarding My goodness. I answered, 

"What do You mean, Lord, what if I write too much?" And the Lord replied, My daughter, 
even if you were to speak at one and the same time in all human and angelic 
tongues, even then you would not have said very much, but on the contrary, you 
would have sung in only a small measure the praises of My goodness-of My 
unfathomable mercy. 

0 my J esus, You Yourself must put words into my mouth, that I may praise You worthily. 

My daughter, be at peace; do as I tell you. Your thoughts are united to My 
thoughts, so write whatever comes to your mind. You are the secretary of My 
mercy. I have chosen you for that office in this life and the next life. That is how I 
want it to be in spite all the opposition they will give you. Know that My choice will 
not change. 

At that moment I steeped myself in profound humility before God's majesty. But the more I 
humbled myself, the more God's presence penetrated me... 

1606 O J esus, my only solace! How frightful is this exile! How terrible this wilderness I have to 
cross! My soul is struggling through a terrible thicket of all kinds of difficulties. If You 
Yourself did not support me, Lord, there would be no thought of my moving forward. 



1607 16 [February] 1938. As I was praying to the living Heart of Jesus in the Blessed Sacrament 
for the intention of a certain priest, J esus suddenly gave me knowledge of His goodness and 
said to me, I will give him nothing that is beyond his strength. 

1608 + When I learned of some of the sufferings and troubles that a certain person 236 was going 
through in connection with this whole work of God, I asked the Lord Jesus before Holy 
Communion that He might make known to me whether by any chance these sufferings were 
not caused by me: "My sweetest J esus, I implore You by Your infinite goodness and mercy, 
make known to me whether anything in this matter displeases You or whether there is

some fault of mine in this. If there is, I ask You, when You enter my heart, fill it with unrest 
and make known to me Your displeasure. And if I am not guilty in this matter, confirm me 
in peace." When I received the Lord, my soul was filled with great peace, and the Lord gave 
me to know that the work was undergoing a trial, but was no less pleasing to God because 
of this. I felt great joy at this but I redoubled my prayers so that this work might come 
through the ordeal unharmed. 

1609 0 my Jesus, how good it is to be on the cross, but with You! With You, my Love, my soul is 
constantly stretched out on the cross and is being filled with bitterness. Vinegar and gall 
touch my lips, but it is good that it is so, because Your Divine Heart was filled with 
bitterness throughout Your life, and in return for Your love You received ingratitude. You 
were in such pain that a sorrowful complaint escaped Your lips when You said that You were 
looking for someone to console You and You found none [cf. Ps. 68:21]. 

1610 + When I asked the Lord to be so good as to cast a glance upon a certain soul [probably 
Father Sopocko] who was struggling alone against many difficulties, the Lord gave me to 
know, in an instant, that all people are as dust under His feet. So do not worry; you see 
that they cannot do a thing of themselves. And if I allow them to seem to triumph, 

I do this for the sake of My impenetrable decrees. I experienced great peace in seeing 
how all things are determined by the Lord. 

1611 + When the chaplain [ Father Theodore] brings me the Lord J esus, there are moments when 
I am pervaded with a very vivid presence of God, and the Lord gives me to know His 
holiness. At such times, I see the smallest speck on my soul, and I would like to purify my 
soul before every Holy Communion. When I asked the confessor, he said there was no need 
to confess before every Holy Communion. Holy Communion takes away these tiny things 
and it is a temptation to think about confession when receiving Holy Communion. I did not 
go on to explain the condition of my soul in any greater detail, because he was not my 
director, but the confessor. 237 This knowledge does not take up my time, because it is faster 
than lightning; it enkindles my love, leaving me with a knowledge of myself... 

1612 + February 20, [1938]. Today the Lord said to me, I have need of your sufferings to 
rescue souls. 

O my J esus, do with me as You please. I did not have the courage to ask the Lord J esus for 
greater sufferings, because I had suffered so much the night before that I would not have 
been able to bear a drop more than what J esus Himself gave me. 


1613 Almost all night I had such violent pains that it seemed all my intestines were torn to 
pieces. I threw up the medicine I had taken. When I bowed my head down to the ground, I 
lost consciousness, and I stayed like