 great anger and fury. He seized the 
screen and began to break and crush it. I was a little frightened at first, but I immediately 
made the sign of the cross with my little crucifix, and the beast fell quiet and disappeared at 
once. Today, I did not see this hideous figure but only his anger. Satan's anger is terrible, 
and yet the screen was not shattered or broken, and I went on writing quietly. I know well 
that the wretch will not touch me without God's willing it, but what is he up to? He is 
beginning to attack me openly and with such great fury and hate, but he does not disturb my 
peace for a moment, and this composure of mine makes him furious. 


714 + The Lord said to me today: Go to the Superior and tell her that I want all the sisters 
and wards to say the chaplet which I have taught you. They are to say it for nine 
days in the chapel in order to appease My Father and to entreat God's mercy for 

Poland. I answered the Lord that I would tell her, but that I must first speak about this with 
Father Andrasz, and I resolved that as soon as Father comes I will speak to him at once 
about this matter. When Father arrived, the circumstances were such that they prevented me 
from seeing him, but I should not have paid any attention to the circumstances and should 
have gone and settled the matter. I thought to myself, "Well, I'll do it when he comes again." 

715 Oh, how much that displeased God! In one moment, the presence of God left me, that great 
presence of God which is continuously within me in a distinctly felt way. At that moment, 
however, it completely left me. Darkness dominated my soul to such an extent that I did not 
know whether I was in the state of grace or not. Therefore, I did not receive Holy 
Communion for four days, after which I saw Father Andrasz and told him everything. He 
comforted me, saying, "You have not lost the grace of God, but all the same, be true to 
Him." The moment I left the confessional, God's presence enveloped me as before. I 
understood that God's grace must be received just as God sends it, in the way He wants, and 
one must receive it in that form under which God sends it to us. . 

716 0 my J esus, I am making at this very moment a firm and eternal resolution by virtue of Your 
grace and mercy, fidelity to the tiniest grace of Yours. 

717 All night long, I was preparing to receive Holy Communion, since I could not sleep because of 
physical suffering. My soul was flooded with love and repentance. 

718 After Holy Communion, I heard these words: - You see what you are of yourself, but do 
not be frightened at this. If I were to reveal to you the whole misery that you are, 
you would die of terror. However, be aware of what you are. Because you are such 
great misery, I have revealed to you the whole ocean of My mercy. I seek and 
desire souls like yours, but they are few. Your great trust in Me forces Me to 
continuously grant you graces. You have great and incomprehensible rights over My 
Heart, for you are a daughter of complete trust. You would not have been able to 
bear the magnitude of the love which I have for you if I had revealed it to you fully 
here on earth. I often give you a glimpse of it, but know that this is only an 
exceptional grace from Me. My love and mercy knows no bounds. 

719 Today, I heard these words: Know, my child, that for your sake I grant blessings to 
this whole vicinity. But you ought to thank Me on their behalf, as they do not thank 
Me for the kindnesses I extend to them. For the sake of your gratitude, I will 
continue to bless them. 

720 O my J esus, You know how difficult community life is, how many misunderstandings and 
misconceptions, despite at times the most sincere good will on both sides. But that is Your 
mystery, 0 Lord. We shall know it in eternity; however, our judgments should always be 
mild.

721 It is a great, an immeasurably great grace of God to have a spiritual director. I feel now that, 
without him, I would not be able to journey alone in my spiritual life. Great is the power of a 
priest. I thank God unceasingly for giving me a spiritual director. 



722 + Today, I heard these words: You see how weak you are, so when shall I be able to 
count on you? I answered, "Jesus, be always with me, for I am Your little child. Jesus, You 
know what little children do." 

723 + Today, I heard these words: The graces I grant you are not for you alone, but for a 
great number of other souls as well... And your heart is My constant dwelling place, 
despite the misery that you are. I unite Myself with you, take away your misery and 
give you My mercy. I perform works of mercy in every soul. The greater the sinner, 
the greater the right he has to My mercy. My mercy is confirmed in every work of 
My hands. He who trusts in My mercy will not perish, for all his affairs are Mine, and 
his enemies will be shattered at the base of My footstool. 

724 On the eve of the retreat, I started to pray that the Lord J esus might give me just a little 
health so that I could take part in the retreat, because I was feeling so ill that I thought 
perhaps it might be my last. However, as soon as I had started praying I felt a strange 
dissatisfaction. I interrupted the prayer of supplication and began to thank the Lord for 
everything He sends me, submitting myself completely to His holy will. Then I felt profound 
peace of soul. + Faithful submission to the will of God, always and everywhere, in all events 
and circumstances of life, gives great glory to God. Such submission to the will of God carries 
more weight with Him than long fasts, mortifications and the most severe penances. Oh, how 
great is the reward for one act of loving submission to the will of God! As I write, my soul is 
enraptured at the thought of how much God loves it and of the peace that my soul already 
enjoys, here on earth. 

+ J .M.J . Cracow, 1936 
O Divine Will, be my love! 

725 + Eight-day Retreat, October 20, 1936. 

My Jesus, I am going into the wilderness today to speak only with You, my Master and my 
Lord. Let the earth be silent, and You alone speak to me, Jesus. You know that I understand 
no other voice but Yours, O Good Shepherd. In the dwelling of my heart is that wilderness to 
which no creature has access. There, You alone are King. 

726 +When I entered the chapel for a five-minute adoration, I asked the Lord Jesus how I should 
conduct myself during this retreat. Then I heard this voice in my soul: I desire that you be 
entirely transformed into love and that you burn ardently as a pure victim of love... 

727 Eternal Truth, give me a ray of Your light that I may come to know You, O Lord, and worthily 
glorify Your infinite mercy. And at the same time, grant me to know myself, the whole abyss 
of misery that I am 

728 + I have chosen Saint Claude de la Colombiere and Saint Gertrude as my patron saints for 
this retreat, that they may intercede for me before the Mother of God and the merciful 
Savior. 



729 During the meditation on creation... at a certain point, my soul became closely united to its 
Lord and Creator. In this union, I recognized the purpose and destiny of my life. My purpose 
is to become closely united to God through love, and my destiny is to praise and glorify God's 
mercy. 

The Lord has allowed me to know and experience this in a distinct and even physical way. I 
become lost in admiration when I recognize and experience this incomprehensible love of 
God with which God loves me. Who is God-and what am I? I cannot meditate on this any 
further. Only love can understand this meeting of two spirits, namely, God-who-is-Spirit and 
the soul-who-is-creature. The more I know Him, the more completely with all the strength of 
my being I drown in Him. 

730 + I n this retreat, I shall keep you continually close to My Heart, that you may 
better know My mercy, that mercy which I have for people and especially for poor 
sinners. 

731 On the initial day of the retreat, I was visited by one of the sisters ri43i who had come to 
make her perpetual vows. She confided to me that she had no trust in God and became 
discouraged at every little thing. I answered her, "It is well that you have told me this, 

Sister; I will pray for you." And I spoke a few words to her about how much distrust hurts

the Lord J esus, especially distrust on the part of a chosen soul. She told me that, beginning 
with her perpetual vows, she would practice trust. Now I know that even [some] souls that 
are chosen and welladvanced in the religious life or the spiritual life do not have the courage 
to entrust themselves completely to God. And this is so because few souls know the 
unfathomable mercy of God and His great goodness. 

732 + The great majesty of God which pervaded me today and still pervades me awoke in me a 
great fear, but a fear filled with respect, and not the fear of a slave, which is quite different 
from the fear of respect. This fear animated by respect arose in my heart today because of 
love and the knowledge of the greatness of God, and that is a great joy to the soul. The soul 
trembles before the smallest offense against God; but that does not trouble or darken its 
happiness. There, where love is in charge, all is well. 

733 It sometimes happens, while I am listening to the meditation, that one word puts me in very 
close union with the Lord, and I no longer know what Father ri44i is saying. I know that I am 
close to the most merciful Heart of Jesus; my whole spirit is entirely plunged in Him, and in 
one moment I learn more than during long hours of intellectual inquiry and meditation. These 
are sudden lights which permit me to know things as God sees them, regarding matters of 
both the interior and the exterior world. 

734 I see that J esus himself is acting in my soul during this retreat. And as for me, I try only to 
be faithful to His grace. I have submitted my soul completely to the influence of God. This 
Mighty Ruler of Heaven has taken entire possession of my soul. I feel that I am being lifted 
up above earth and heaven into the inner life of God, where I come to know the Father, the 
Son and the Holy Spirit, but always in the unity of majesty. 


735 + I will enclose myself in the chalice of Jesus so that I may comfort Him continually. I will do 
everything within my power to save souls, and I will do it through prayer and suffering. 

+ 1 try always to be a Bethany for Jesus, so that He may rest here after all His labors. In Holy 
Communion, my union with Jesus is so intimate and incomprehensible that even if I wanted 
to describe it in writing I could not do so, because I lack the words. 

736 This evening, I saw the Lord J esus just as He was during His Passion. His eyes were raised 
up to His Father, and He was praying for us. I %-l 

737 + Although I was ill, I made up my mind to make a Holy Hour today as usual. During that 
hour, I saw the Lord J esus being scourged at the pillar. I n the midst of this frightful torture, 
Jesus was praying. After a while, He said to me, There are few souls who contemplate 
My Passion with true feeling; I give great graces to souls who meditate devoutly on 
My Passion. 

738 + Without special help from Me, you are not even capable of accepting My graces. 
You know who you are. 

739 After Holy Communion today, I spoke at length to the Lord J esus about people who are 
special to me. Then I heard these words: My daughter, don't be exerting yourself so 
much with words. Those whom you love in a special way, I too love in a special 
way, and for your sake, I shower My graces upon them. I am pleased when you tell 
Me about them, but don't be doing so with such excessive effort. 

740 + O Savior of the world. I unite myself with Your mercy. My J esus, I join all my sufferings to 
Yours and deposit them in the treasury of the Church for the benefit of souls. 

741 Today, I was led by an Angel to the chasms of hell. It is a place of great torture; how 
awesomely large and extensive it is! The kinds of tortures I saw: the first torture that 
constitutes hell is the loss of God; the second is perpetual remorse of conscience; the third is 
that one's condition will never change; the fourth is the fire that will penetrate the soul 
without destroying it-a terrible suffering, since it is a purely spiritual fire, lit by God's anger; 
the fifth torture is continual darkness and a terrible suffocating smell, and, despite the 
darkness, the devils and the souls of the damned see each other and all the evil, both of 
others and their own; the sixth torture is the constant company of Satan; the seventh torture 
is horrible despair, hatred of God, vile words, curses and blasphemies. These are the tortures

suffered by all the damned together, but that is not the end of the sufferings. There are 
special tortures destined for particular souls. These are the torments of the senses. Each soul 
undergoes terrible and indescribable sufferings, related to the manner in which it has sinned. 
There are caverns and pits of torture where one form of agony differs from another. I would 
have died at the very sight of these tortures if the omnipotence of God had not supported 
me. Let the sinner know that he will be tortured throughout all eternity, in those senses 
which he made use of to sin. I am writing this at the command of God, so that no soul may 
find an excuse by saying there is no hell, or that nobody has ever been there, and so no one 
can say what it is like. 

I, Sister Faustina, by the order of God, have visited the abysses of hell so that I might tell 
souls about it and testify to its existence. I cannot speak about it now; but I have received a 
command from God to leave it in writing. The devils were full of hatred for me, but they had 
to obey me at the command of God. What I have written is but a pale shadow of the things I 



saw. But I noticed one thing: that most of the souls there are those who disbelieved that 
there is a hell. When I came to, I could hardly recover from the fright. How terribly souls 
suffer there! Consequently, I pray even more fervently for the conversion of sinners. I 
incessantly plead God's mercy upon them. 0 my Jesus, I would rather be in agony until the 
end of the world, amidst the greatest sufferings, than offend You by the least sin. 

+ J.M.J. 

742 My daughter, if I demand through you that people revere My mercy, you should be 
the first to distinguish yourself by this confidence in My mercy. I demand from you 
deeds of mercy, which are to arise out of love for Me. You are to show mercy to 
your neighbors always and everywhere. You must not shrink from this or try to 
excuse or absolve yourself from it. 

I am giving you three ways of exercising mercy toward your neighbor: the first-by 
deed, the second-by word, the third-by prayer. I n these three degrees is contained 
the fullness of mercy, and it is an unquestionable proof of love for Me. By this 
means a soul glorifies and pays reverence to My mercy. Yes, the first Sunday after 
Easter is the Feast of Mercy, but there must also be acts of mercy, and I demand 
the worship of My mercy through the solemn celebration of the Feast and through 
the veneration of the image which is painted. By means of this image I shall grant 
many graces to souls. It is to be a reminder of the demands of My mercy, because 
even the strongest faith is of no avail without works. 0 my J esus, You yourself must 
help me in everything, because You see how very little I am, and so I depend solely on Your 
goodness, 0 God. 

+ Particular Examen 

Union with the merciful Christ. With my heart I encompass the whole world, especially 
countries which are uncivilized or where there is persecution. I am praying for mercy upon 
them. 

743 Two general resolutions: 

First : To strive after inner silence and to observe the rule of silence strictly. 

Second : Faithfulness to interior inspirations; to bring them into my life and actions according 
to the advice of my spiritual director. 

In this present illness, I desire to glorify the will of God. I will try, as far as I am able, to take 
part in all the community exercises. I will give the Lord God fervent thanks for every sorrow 
and suffering. 

744 + I often feel that, apart from Jesus, I get no help from anyone, although sometimes I am 
very much in need of clarifications concerning the demands of the Lord. 

This evening, I suddenly received light from God regarding a certain matter. For twelve 
years, I have been reflecting on a certain matter and could not understand it. Today, Jesus 
gave me to know how much that had pleased Him. 


The Feast of Christ the King. [October 25, 1936] 



745 During Holy Mass, I was so enveloped in the great interior fire of God's love and the desire to 
save souls that I do not know how to express it. I feel I am all aflame. I shall fight all evil 
with the weapon of mercy. I am being burned up by the desire to save souls. I traverse the 
world's length and breadth and venture as far as its ultimate limits and its wildest lands to 
save souls. I do this through prayer and sacrifice. I want every soul to glorify the mercy of

God, for each one experiences the effects of that mercy on himself. The Saints in heaven 
worship the mercy of the Lord. I want to worship it even now, here on earth, and to spread 
devotion to it in the way that God demands of me. 

746 I have understood that at certain and most difficult moments I shall be alone, deserted by 
everyone, and that I must face all the storms and fight with all the strength of my soul, even 
with those from whom I expected to get help. 

But I am not alone, because Jesus is with me, and with Him I fear nothing. I am well aware 
of everything, and I know what God is demanding of me. Suffering, contempt, ridicule, 
persecution and humiliation will be my constant lot. I know no other way. For sincere love- 
ingratitude; this is my path, marked out by the footprints of Jesus. 

My Jesus, my strength and my only hope, in You alone is all my hope. My trust will not be 
frustrated. 

747 The day of renewal of vows [Friday, October 30, 1936]. God's presence pervades my soul, 
not only in a spiritual way, but I feel it in a physical way also. 

748 November 2, [1936]. In the evening after Vespers, I went to the cemetery [in the sisters' 
park]. I had been praying for a while when I saw one of our sisters, who said to me, "We are 
in the chapel." I understood that I was to go to the chapel and there pray and gain the 
indulgences. The next day, during Holy Mass, I saw three white doves soaring from the altar 
toward heaven. I understood that not only the three souls that I saw had gone to heaven, 
but also many others who had died beyond the confines of our institute. Oh, how good and 
merciful is the Lord! 

749 Conversation with Father Andrasz, at the end of the retreat. I was greatly surprised by one 
thing that I noticed during each conversation in the course of which I had asked advice and 
direction of Father Andrasz, and it is this: I noticed that Father Andrasz answered all my 
questions about things which the Lord has asked of me so clearly and with such assurance 
that it was as though he were experiencing it all himself. O my J esus, if only there were more 
spiritual directors of this kind, souls under such guidance would very quickly reach the 
summits of sanctity and would not waste such great graces! I give unceasing thanks to God 
for so great a grace; namely, that in His great goodness He has deigned to place these pillars 
of light along the path of my spiritual life. They light my way so that I do not go astray or 
become delayed in my journey toward close union with the Lord. I have a great love for the 
Church, which educates souls and leads them to God. 



750 October 31, 1936. Conversation with Mother General [Michael]. 

When I was talking to Mother General about the question of my leaving the Order, I received 
this answer: "If Jesus demands of you that you leave this Congregation, let Him give me 
some sign that this is His will. Sister, pray for such a sign, because I am worried lest you 
should fall prey to some illusion. On the other hand, I would not want to hinder or oppose the 
will of God, for I too want to do the will of God." And so, we agreed that I will still remain 
just as I am, until such time as the Lord will let Mother General know that He demands that I 
leave this Congregation. And so the matter was put off for a while. 


Notebook I: 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-521 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1 001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1 201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-1 321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 - 1450 t 145 1-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 2 


751 And so You see, Jesus, that everything is now up to You. I am perfectly at peace, despite 
these great urgings. For my part, I have done everything, and it is now Your turn, my J esus, 
and in this way Your cause will be made apparent. I am totally in accord with Your will; do

with me as You please, 0 Lord, but only grant me the grace of loving You more and more 
ardently. This is what is most precious to me. I desire nothing but You, 0 Love Eternal! It 
matters not along what paths You will lead me, paths of pain or paths of joy. I want to love 
You at every moment of my life. If You tell me to leave, 0 J esus, in order to carry out Your 
will, I will leave. If You tell me to stay, I will stay. It matters not what I will suffer, in the one 
instance or the other. 0 my J esus, if I leave, I know what I shall have to suffer and endure. I 
agreed to this with full awareness, and I have already accepted it by an act of the will. It 
does not matter what the chalice holds for me. It is enough for me to know that it has been 
given to me by the loving hand of God. If you tell me to turn back and stay, I will stay in 
spite of all the interior urgings. If You still keep them in my soul and leave me in this inner 
agony even to the end of my life, I accept this in the full consciousness of my will and in 
loving submission to You, 0 my God. If I stay, I shall hide myself in Your mercy, my God, so 
deeply that no human eye will see me. Throughout my life, I want to be a thurible filled with 
hidden fire, and may the smoke rising up to You, 0 Living Host, be pleasing to You. I'll feel in 
my own heart that every little sacrifice arouses the fire of my love for You, but in such a 
silent and secret way that no one will detect it. 

752 When I told Mother General that the Lord wanted the Congregation to say the chaplet in 
order to propitiate God's anger, Mother told me that at present she could not introduce new 
prayers that had not yet been approved... "But give me the chaplet, Sister, [she said; ] 
perhaps it can be said during an adoration. We shall see. It would be good if Father Sopocko 
could publish a pamphlet with the chaplet; then it would be better and easier to recite it in 
the Congregation, for it is a bit difficult to do so now." 

753 The mercy of the Lord is praised by the holy souls in heaven who have themselves 
experienced that infinite mercy. What these souls do in heaven, I already will begin to do 
here on earth. I will praise God for His infinite goodness, and I will strive to bring other souls 
to know and glorify the inexpressible and incomprehensible mercy of God. 

754 +The Lord's Promise: The souls that say this chaplet will be embraced by My mercy 
during their lifetime and especially at the hour of their death. 

755 O my J esus, teach me to open the bosom of mercy and love to everyone who asks for it. 

J esus, my Commander, teach me so that all my prayers and deeds may bear the seal of Your 
mercy. 



756 November 18, 1936. Today, I tried to make all my exercises before Benediction, because I 
was feeling more ill than usual. So I went to bed directly after Benediction. But when I 
entered the bedroom, I suddenly knew interiorly that I should go to the cell of S.N., r i45i 
because she was in need of help. I entered her cell at once, and S.N. said to me, "Oh, how 
good it is that God has brought you here, Sister!" And her voice was so faint that I could 
hardly hear her. She said to me, "Sister, please bring me some tea with lemon, because I am 
terribly thirsty, and I cannot move because I am in such pain." And truly, she was suffering 
very much and had a high fever. I made her more comfortable, and she was able to quench 
her thirst with the little bit of tea that I brought her. When I entered my own cell, my soul 
was engulfed by the great love of God, and I understood that we should take great heed of 
our interior inspirations and follow them faithfully, and that faithfulness to one grace draws 
down others. 

757 November 19, [ 1936]. During Mass today, I saw the Lord J esus, who said to me, Be at 
peace. My daughter; I see your efforts, which are very pleasing to Me. And the Lord 
disappeared, and it was time for Holy Communion. After I received Holy Communion, I 
suddenly saw the Cenacle and in it J esus and the Apostles. I saw the institution of the Most 
Blessed Sacrament. Jesus allowed me to penetrate His interior, and I came to know the 
greatness of His majesty and, at the same time, His great humbling of Himself. The 
extraordinary light that allowed me to see His majesty revealed to me, at the same time, 
what was in my own soul. 

758 Jesus gave me to know the depth of His meekness and humility and to understand that He

clearly demanded the same of me. I felt the gaze of God in my soul. This filled me with 
unspeakable love, but I understood that the Lord was looking with love on my virtues and my 
heroic efforts, and I knew that this was what was drawing God into my heart. It is from this 
that I have come to understand that it is not enough for me to strive only for the ordinary 
virtues, but that I must try to exercise the heroic virtues. Although exteriorly a thing may be 
quite ordinary, it is the different manner [in which it is carried out] that only the eye of God 
catches. 0 my J esus, what I have written is just a pale shadow of what I understand in my 
soul; these are purely spiritual things, but in order to write something of what the Lord gives 
me to know, I must use words with which I am totally dissatisfied, because they do not 
express the reality. 

759 When I experienced these sufferings for the first time, it was like this: after the annual vows, 
fi46i on a certain day, during prayer, I saw a great brilliance and, issuing from the brilliance, 
rays which completely enveloped me. Then suddenly, I felt a terrible pain in my hands, my 
feet and my side and the thorns of the crown of thorns. I experienced these sufferings during 
Holy Mass on Friday, but this was only for a brief moment. This was repeated for several 
Fridays, and later on I did not experience any sufferings up to the present time; that is, up to 
the end of September of this year. I n the course of the present illness, during Holy Mass one 
Friday, I felt myself pierced by the same sufferings, and this has been repeated on every 
Friday and sometimes when I meet a soul that is not in the state of grace. Although this is 
infrequent, and the suffering lasts a very short time, still it is terrible, and I would not be 
able to bear it without a special grace from God. There is no outward indication of these 
sufferings. What will come later, I do not know. All this, for the sake of souls... 

760 November 21, [1936]. Jesus, You see that I am neither gravely ill nor in good health. You fill 
my soul with enthusiasm for action, and I have no strength. The fire of Your love burns in 
me, and for what I cannot accomplish by physical strength, love will compensate. 


761 Jesus, my spirit yearns for You, and I desire very much to be united with You, but Your works 
hold me back. The number of souls that I am to bring to You is not yet complete. I desire toil 
and suffering; let everything You have planned before the ages be fulfilled in me, 0 my 
Creator and Lord! It is only Your word that I understand; it alone gives me strength. Your 
Spirit, 0 Lord, is the Spirit of Peace; and nothing troubles my depths because You dwell 
there, 0 Lord. 

I know that I am under Your special gaze, 0 Lord. I do not examine with fear Your plans 
regarding me; my task is to accept everything from Your hand. I do not fear anything, 
although the storm is raging, and frightful bolts strike all around me, and I then feel quite 
alone. Yet, my heart senses You, and my trust grows, and I see all Your omnipotence which 
upholds me. With You, Jesus, I go through life, amid storms and rainbows, with a cry of joy, 
singing the song of Your mercy. I will not stop singing my song of love until the choir of 
Angels picks it up. There is no power that can stop me in my flight toward God. I see that 
even the superiors do not always understand the road along which God is leading me, and I 
am not surprised at this. 

762 Once, I saw Father Sopocko praying as he was reflecting on these matters. Then I saw how a 
ring of light appeared suddenly above his head. Although distance separates us, I often see 
him, especially as he works at his desk, despite his fatigue. 

763 November 22, [1936]. Today during confession, the Lord Jesus spoke to me through the lips 
of a certain priest. This priest did not know my soul, and I only accused myself of my sins; 
yet he spoke these words to me: "Accomplish faithfully everything that J esus asks of you, 
despite the difficulties. Know that, although people may be angry with you, Jesus is not 
angry and never will be angry with you. Pay no attention to human opinion." This instruction 
surprised me at first; but I understood that the Lord was speaking through him without his 
realizing it. 0 holy mystery, what great treasures are contained in you! 0 holy faith, you are 
my guidepost!

764 November 24. Today, I received a letter from Father Sopocko. r 1471 I learned from it that God 
himself is conducting this whole affair. And as the Lord has begun it, so will He continue to 
carry it along. And the greater the difficulties which I see, the more am I at peace. Oh, if in 
this whole matter the glory of God and the profit to souls were not greatly served, Satan 
would not be opposing it so much. But he senses what he is going to lose because of it. I 
have now learned that Satan hates mercy more than anything else. It is his greatest 
torment. Still, the word of God will not pass away; God's utterance is living; difficulties will 
not suppress the works of God, but show that they are God's... 

765 On one occasion, I saw the convent of the new congregation, r i 48 i As I walked about, 
inspecting everything, I suddenly saw a crowd of children who seemed to be no older than 
five to eleven years of age. When they saw me they surrounded me and began to cry out, 
"Defend us from evil," and they led me into the chapel which was in this convent. When I 
entered the chapel, I saw the distressful Lord Jesus. Jesus looked at me graciously and said 
that He was gravely offended by children: You are to defend them from evil. From that 
moment, I have been praying for children, but I feel that prayer alone is not enough. 


766 0 my Jesus, you know what efforts are needed to live sincerely and unaffectedly with those 
from whom our nature flees, or with those who, deliberately or not, have made us suffer. 
Humanly speaking, this is impossible. At such times more than at others, I try to discover the 
Lord J esus in such a person and for this same J esus, I do everything for such people. I n such 
acts, love is pure, and such practice of love gives the soul endurance and strength. I do not 
expect anything from creatures, and therefore I am not disappointed. I know that a creature 
is poor of itself, so what can one expect from it? God is everything for me; I want to evaluate 
everything according to God's ways. 

767 + My communion with the Lord is now purely spiritual. My soul is touched by God and wholly 
absorbs itself in Him, even to the complete forgetfulness of self. Permeated by God to its 
very depths, it drowns in His beauty; it completely dissolves in Him-I am at a loss to describe 
this, because in writing I am making use of the senses; but there, in that union, the senses 
are not active; there is a merging of God and the soul; and the life of God to which the soul 

is admitted is so great that the human tongue cannot express it. 

When the soul returns to its habitual form of life, it then sees that this life is all darkness and 
mist and dreamlike confusion, an infant's swaddling clothes. In such moments the soul only 
receives from God, for of itself it does nothing; it does not make even the slightest effort; all 
in her is wrought by God. But when the soul returns to its ordinary state, it sees that it is not 
within its power to continue in this union. 

These moments are short, but their effects are lasting. The soul cannot remain long in this 
state; or else it would be forcibly freed of the bonds of the body forever. Even as it is, it is 
sustained by a miracle of God. God allows the soul to know in a clear way how much He 
loves it, as though it were the only object of His delight. The soul recognizes this clearly and 
without a veil, so to speak. It reaches out for God with all its might, but it feels like a baby; it 
knows that this is not within its power. Therefore, God descends to the soul and unites it to 
himself in a way that... here, I must be silent, for I cannot describe what the soul 
experiences. 

768 It is a strange thing that although the soul which experiences this union with God cannot find 
words and expressions to describe it, nevertheless, when it meets a similar soul, the two 
understand each other extraordinarily well in regard to these matters, even though they 
speak but little with each other. A soul united with God in this way easily recognizes a similar 
soul, even if the latter has not revealed its interior [life] to it, but merely speaks in an 
ordinary way. It is a kind of spiritual kinship. Souls united with God in this way are few, 
fewer than we think. 

769 I have noticed that the Lord grants this grace to souls for two purposes. The first is when the 
soul is to do some great work which is, humanly speaking, absolutely beyond its power. In

the second case, I have noticed that the Lord grants it in order that kindred souls might be 
guided and set at peace, although the Lord can grant this grace as He pleases and to 
whomever He pleases. However, I have noticed this grace in three priests, one of whom is a 
secular priest [probably Father Sopocko] and the other two, religious priests [probably Father 
Elter and Father Andrasz], and also in two religious sisters [probably Mother Michael and 
Sister Mary J oseph], but not in the same degree. 



770 As for myself, I received this grace for the first time, and that for only a brief moment, in the 
eighteenth r 1491 year of my life, within the octave of Corpus Christi [J une 18-25, 1925], 
during Vespers, when I made to the Lord J esus the vow of perpetual chastity. I was still 
living in the world, but I entered the convent soon afterwards. The grace lasted for a very 
brief moment, but its power was great. After this grace, there was a long interval. It is true 
that I received many graces from the Lord during this interval, but they were of a different 
order. It was a time of trials and purification. The trials were so painful that my soul felt as 
though it was being totally abandoned by God and it was steeped in profound darkness. I 
became aware and understood that no one would be able to bring me out of those torments 
or even understand me. 

There were two occasions when my soul was plunged into despair, once for half an hour, and 
the second time for three quarters of an hour. J ust as I cannot describe the greatness of the 
graces, so too with these ordeals sent by the Lord; whatever words I might use, they are 
only a pale shadow [of the reality]. However, just as the Lord plunged me into these 
torments, so too He brought me out of them. Only this lasted for a few years, after which I 
again received this extraordinary grace of union which has continued to this day. Still, during 
this second period of union, there also have been short interruptions. But for some time now, 

I have not experienced any interruption at all; on the contrary, I am more and more deeply 
steeped in God. The great light which illumines the mind gives me a knowledge of the 
greatness of God; but it is not as if I were getting to know the individual attributes, as before- 
no, it is different now: in one moment, I come to know the entire essence of God. 

771 In that same moment, the soul drowns entirely in Him and experiences a happiness as great 
as that of the chosen ones in heaven. Although the chosen ones in heaven see God face to 
face and are completely and absolutely happy, still their knowledge of God is not the same. 
God has given me to understand this. This deeper knowledge begins here on earth, 
depending on the grace [given], but to a great extent it also depends on our faithfulness to 
that grace. 

However, the soul receiving this unprecedented grace of union with God cannot say that it 
sees God face to face, because even here there is a very thin veil of faith, but so very thin 
that the soul can say that it sees God and talks with Him. It is "divinized." God allows the 
soul to know how much He loves it, and the soul sees that better and holier souls than itself 
have not received this grace. Therefore, it is filled with holy amazement, which maintains it 
in deep humility, and it steeps itself in its own nothingness and holy astonishment; and the 
more it humbles itself, the more closely God unites himself with it and descends to it. 

The soul, at this moment is, as it were, hidden; its senses are inactive; in one moment, it 
knows God and drowns in Him. It knows the whole depth of the Unfathomable One, and the 
deeper this knowledge, the more ardently the soul desires Him. 

772 Great is the mutual exchange between the soul and God. When the soul leaves its 
concealment, the senses get a taste of what the soul has delighted in. Although this also is a 
great grace from God, it is not a purely spiritual one, for in the first moments the senses do 
not take part. Every grace gives the soul power and strength to act, and courage to suffer. 
The soul knows very well what God is asking of it, and it carries out His holy will despite 
adversities. 


773 Yet, the soul cannot proceed on its own in these matters. It must follow the advice of an 
enlightened confessor, for otherwise it could go astray or gain no profit.

774 + O my Jesus, I understand well that, just as illness is measured with a thermometer, and a 
high fever tells us of the seriousness of the illness, so also, in the spiritual life, suffering is 
the thermometer which measures the love of God in a soul. 

775 + My goal is God... and my happiness is in accomplishing His will, and nothing in the world 
can disturb this happiness for me: no power, no force of any kind. 

776 The Lord visited my cell today and said to me, My daughter, I will not leave you in this 
community for much longer. I am telling you this so that you will be more diligent 
in taking advantage of the graces which I grant you. 

777 November 27, [1936]. Today I was in heaven, in spirit, and I saw its inconceivable beauties 
and the happiness that awaits us after death. I saw how all creatures give ceaseless praise 
and glory to God. I saw how great is happiness in God, which spreads to all creatures, 
making them happy; and then all the glory and praise which springs from this happiness 
returns to its source; and they enter into the depths of God, contemplating the inner life of 
God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, whom they will never comprehend or fathom. 

This source of happiness is unchanging in its essence, but it is always new, gushing forth 
happiness for all creatures. Now I understand Saint Paul, who said, "Eye has not seen, nor 
has ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man what God has prepared for those who 
love Him." 

778 And God has given me to understand that there is but one thing that is of infinite value in His 
eyes, and that is love of God; love, love and once again, love; and nothing can compare with 
a single act of pure love of God. Oh, with what inconceivable favors God gifts a soul that 
loves Him sincerely! Oh, how happy is the soul who already here on earth enjoys His special 
favors! And of such are the little and humble souls. 

779 The sight of this great majesty of God, which I came to understand more profoundly and 
which is worshiped by the heavenly spirits according to their degree of grace and the 
hierarchies into which they are divided, did not cause my soul to be stricken with terror or 
fear; no, no, not at all! My soul was filled with peace and love, and the more I come to know 
the greatness of God, the more joyful I become that He is as He is. And I rejoice immensely 
in His greatness and am delighted that I am so little because, since I am little, He carries me 
in His arms and holds me close to His Heart. 

780 O my God, how I pity those people who do not believe in eternal life; how I pray for them 
that a ray of mercy would envelop them too, and that God would clasp them to His fatherly 
bosom. 

781 O Love, 0 queen! Love knows no fear. It passes through all the choirs of angels that stand on 
guard before His throne. It will fear no one. It reaches God and is immersed in Him as in its 
sole treasure. The Cherubim who guards paradise with flaming sword, has no power over it. 

0 pure love of God, how great and unequalled you are! Oh, if souls only knew your power! 



782 + I am very weak today. I cannot even make my meditation in the chapel, but must lie 
down. 0 my J esus, I love You, and I want to worship You with my very weakness, submitting 
myself entirely to Your holy will. 

783 + I must be on my guard, especially today, because I am becoming over-sensitive to 
everything. Things I would not pay any attention to when I am healthy bother me today. 0 
my J esus, my shield and my strength, grant me Your grace that I may emerge victorious 
from these combats. O my Jesus, transform me into Yourself by the power of Your love, that 
I may be a worthy tool in proclaiming Your mercy. 

784 + I thank God for this illness and these physical discomforts, because I have time to 
converse with the Lord J esus. It is my delight to spend long hours at the feet of the hidden 
God, and the hours pass like minutes as I lose track of time. I feel that a fire is burning 
within me, and I understand no other life but that of sacrifice, which flows from pure love. 

785 November 29, [1936]. The Mother of God has taught me how to prepare for the Feast of 
Christmas. I saw Her today, without the I nfant J esus. She said to me: My daughter, strive 
after silence and humility, so that Jesus, who dwells in your heart continuously, may be able 
to rest. Adore Him in your heart; do not go out from your inmost being. My daughter, I shall

obtain for you the grace of an interior life which will be such that, without ever leaving that 
interior life, you will be able to carry out all your external duties with even greater care. 

Dwell with Him continuously in your own heart. He will be your strength. Communicate with 
creatures only in so far as is necessary and is required by your duties. You are a dwelling 
place pleasing to the living God, in you He dwells continuously with love and delight. And the 
living presence of God, which you experience in a more vivid and distinct way, will confirm 
you, my daughter, in the things I have told you. Try to act in this way until Christmas Day, 
and then He himself will make known to you in what way you will be communing and uniting 
yourself with Him. 

786 November 30, [1936]. During Vespers today, an unusual pain pierced my soul. I see that, in 
every respect, this work is beyond my strength. I am a little child before the immensity of 
the task, and it is only at the Lord's clear command that I am setting about to carry it out. 

On the other hand, even these great graces are a burden for me, and I am barely able to 
carry them. I see my superiors' disbelief and doubts of all kinds and, for this reason, their 
apprehensive behavior towards me. My Jesus, I see that even such great graces can be [a 
source of] suffering. And yet, it is so; not only may they be a cause of suffering, but they 
must be such, as a sign of God's action. I understand well that if God himself did not 
strengthen the soul in these various ordeals, the soul would not be able to master the 
situation. Thus God himself is its shield. 

As I continued Vespers, meditating on this mixture of suffering and grace, I heard the voice 
of Our Lady: Know, My daughter, that although I was raised to the dignity of Mother of God, 
seven swords of pain pierced My heart. Don't do anything to defend yourself, bear everything 
with humility; God himself will defend you. 


December 1, [1936]. One-day retreat. 



787 Today, during the morning meditation, the Lord gave me to see and understand clearly that 
His demands are unchangeable, I see clearly that no one can release me from the duty of 
doing the known will of God. A great lack of health and physical strength is not a sufficient 
reason and does not release me from this work that the Lord himself is carrying out through 
me. I am to be just a tool in His hands. And so, O Lord, here I am to carry out Your will. 
Command me according to Your eternal plans and desires. Only give me the grace that I may 
always be faithful to You. 

788 As I was conversing with the hidden God, He gave me to see and understand that I should 
not be reflecting so much and building up fear of the difficulties which I might encounter. 

Know that I am with you; I bring about the difficulties, and I overcome them; in 
one instant, I can change a hostile disposition to one which is favorable to this 
cause. The Lord explained many things to me in today's dialogue, although I am not putting 
everything in writing. 

789 Always and in all circumstances, yield the first place to others; especially during recreation 
listen quietly, without interrupting, even if someone tells me the same thing ten times. I will 
never ask questions about something that interests me very much. 

790 Resolution: still the same; namely, to unite myself with the Merciful Christ. 

General resolution: interior calm, silence. 

791 Hide me, Jesus, in the depths of Your mercy, and then let my neighbor judge me as he 
pleases. 

792 I must never speak of my own experiences. In suffering, I must seek relief in prayer. In 
doubts, even the smallest, I must seek only the advice of my confessor. I must always have 
a heart which is open to receive the sufferings of others, and drown my own sufferings in the 
Divine Heart so that they would not be noticed on the outside, in so far as possible. 

I must always strive for equanimity, no matter how stormy the circumstances might be. I 
must not allow anything to disturb my interior calm and silence. Nothing can compare with 
peace of soul. When I am wrongfully accused of something, I will not explain myself; if the 
superior wants to know the truth, whether I was in the right or not, let her find out from 
others rather than from me. My concern is to accept everything with a humble inner 
disposition. 

I will spend this Advent in accordance with the directions of the Mother of God: in meekness

and humility. 

793 I am reliving these moments with Our Lady. With great longing, I am waiting for the Lord's 
coming. Great are my desires. I desire that all humankind come to know the Lord. I would 
like to prepare all nations for the coming of the Word I ncarnate. 0 J esus, make the fount of 
Your mercy gush forth more abundantly, for humankind is seriously ill and thus has more 
need than ever of Your compassion. You are a bottomless sea of mercy for us sinners; and 
the greater the misery, the more right we have to Your mercy. You are a fount which makes 
all creatures happy by Your infinite mercy. 



794 Today [December 9, 1936], I am leaving for Pradnik, just outside Cracow, to undergo 
treatment. I am to stay there for three months. I am being sent there through the great 
solicitude of my superiors, especially that of our dear Mother General [Michael], who is so 
solicitous for the sisters who are ill. 

795 I have accepted the favor of this treatment, but I am fully resigned to the will of God. Let 
God do with me as He pleases. I desire nothing but the fulfillment of His holy will. I am 
uniting myself with the Mother of God, and I am leaving Nazareth and going to Bethlehem. I 
will spend Christmas there among strangers, but with J esus, Mary and J oseph, because such 
is the will of God. I am striving to do the will of God in all things. I do not desire a return to 
health more than death. I entrust myself completely to His infinite mercy and, as a little 
child, I am living in the greatest peace. I am trying only to make my love for Him deeper and 
purer, to be a delight to His divine glance... 

796 The Lord told me to say this chaplet for nine days before the Feast of Mercy. It is to begin on 
Good Friday. By this novena, I will grant every possible grace to souls. 

797 When I was somewhat overcome by the fear that I was to be outside the community for so 
long a time alone, Jesus said to me, You will not be alone, because I am with you 
always and everywhere. Near to My Heart, fear nothing. I myself am the cause of 
your departure. Know that My eyes follow every move of your heart with great 
attention. I am bringing you into seclusion so that I myself may form your heart 
according to My future plans. What are you afraid of? If you are with Me, who will 
dare touch you? Nevertheless, I am very pleased that you confide your fears to Me, 
My daughter: Speak to Me about everything in a completely simple and human way; 
by this you will give Me great joy. I understand you because I am God-Man. This 
simple language of your heart is more pleasing to Me than the hymns composed in 
My honor. Know, My daughter, that the simpler your speech is, the more you attract 
Me to yourself. And now, be at peace close to My Heart. Lay your pen aside and get 
ready to leave. 

798 December 9, 1936. This morning, I left for Pradnik. Sister Chrysostom drove me here. I have 
a private room to myself; I am very much like a Carmelite. When Sister Chrysostom had left 
and I was alone,