 known to me the whole abyss of my 
misery. I know that I am an abyss of nothingness and that, if Your holy grace did not hold 
me up, I would return to nothingness in a moment. And so, with every beat of my heart, I 
thank You, my God, for Your great mercy towards me. 

257 Tomorrow I am to leave for Vilnius. Today, I went to confession to Father Andrasz, this priest 
who is so filled with the spirit of God, who untied my wings so that I could soar to the highest 
summits. He reassured me in everything and told me to believe in Divine Providence. "Have 
confidence and walk ahead with courage." An extraordinary, divine power came over me 
after that confession. Father stressed that I must be faithful to God's grace and said, "No 
harm will come to you if, in the future, you continue to keep this same simplicity and 
obedience. Have confidence in God; you are on the right path and in good hands, in God's 
hands." 

258 +That evening, I remained in the chapel a little longer. I talked to the Lord about a certain 
soul. Encouraged by His goodness, I said, "Jesus, you gave me this Father who understands 
my inspirations, and now You are taking him away from me again. What am I going to do in 
this Vilnius? I don't know anyone there, and even the dialect of the people there is foreign to 
me." And the Lord said to me, Do not fear; I will not leave you to yourself. My soul 
drowned itself in a prayer of thanksgiving for all the graces that the Lord had granted me 
through the mediation of Father Andrasz. 

Suddenly I remembered the vision in which I had seen that priest between the confessional 
and the altar, trusting that I would meet him some day. And the words I had heard came 
back vividly: He will help you to fulfill my will here on earth. 

259 Today, 27 [May 1933], I am leaving for Vilnius. When I came out of the house, I looked at 
the garden and the house, and when I cast a glance at the novitiate, tears suddenly ran 
down my cheeks. I remembered all the blessings and graces bestowed on me by the Lord. 
Then, suddenly and unexpectedly, I saw the Lord by the flower bed, and He said to me, Do 
not weep; I am with you always. God's presence, which enveloped me as Jesus was 
speaking, accompanied me throughout the journey. 

260 I had permission to visit Czestochowa while on my journey. I saw the Mother of God [image] 
for the first time, when I went to attend the unveiling of the image at five in the morning. I 
prayed without interruption until eleven, and it seemed to me that I had just come. The 
superior of the house there [Mother Serafinrzsil sent a sister for me, to tell me to come to 
breakfast and said she was worried that I would miss my train. The Mother of God told me 
many things. I entrusted my perpetual vows to Her. I felt that I was her child and that She 
was my Mother. She did not refuse any of my requests. 


261 +1 am already in Vilnius today. A few scattered tiny huts make up the convent. It seems a bit 
strange to me after the large buildings of Jozefow. There are only eighteen sisters here. The 
house is small, but the community life is more intimate. All the sisters received me very 
warmly, which was for me a great encouragement to endure the hardships that lay ahead. 
Sister J ustine had even scrubbed the floor in anticipation of my arrival. 

262 +When I went to Benediction, Jesus enlightened me on how I was to conduct myself in 
respect to certain persons. I clung with all my might to the most sweet Heart of Jesus, 
knowing how much I would be exposed to external distractions because of the work I would 
be doing here in the garden, where I necessarily would be in close contact with lay persons. 

263 +The week for confession came and, to my great joy, I saw the priest I had known before

coming to Vilnius. [That is to say,] I had known him by seeing him in a vision. At that 
moment, I heard these words in my soul: This is My faithful servant; he will help you to 
fulfill My will here on earth. Yet, I did not open myself to him as the Lord wished. And for 
some time I struggled against grace. During each confession, God's grace penetrated me in a 
very special way, yet I did not reveal my soul before him, and I had the intention of not 
going to confession to that priest. After this decision, a terrible anxiety entered my soul. God 
reproached me severely. When I did lay bare my soul completely to this priest, Jesus poured 
an ocean of graces into it. Now I understand what it means to be faithful to a particular 
grace. That one grace draws down a whole series of others. 

264 +0 my J esus, keep me near to You! See how weak I am! I cannot go a step forward by 
myself; so You, Jesus, must stand by me constantly like a mother by a helpless child-and 
even more so. 

265 Days of work, of struggle and of suffering have begun. Everything continued according to the 
convent routine. One is always a novice, having to learn many things and to get to know 
about many things, because although the rule is the same, each house has its own customs; 
and thus, each change is a little novitiate. 

August 5, 1933. The Feast of Our Lady of Mercy. 


266 Today I received a great and incomprehensible grace, a purely interior one, for which I will 
be grateful to God throughout this life and in eternity... 

267 J esus told me that I please Him best by meditating on His sorrowful Passion, and by such 
meditation much light falls upon my soul. He who wants to learn true humility should reflect 
upon the Passion of Jesus. When I meditate upon the Passion of Jesus, I get a clear 
understanding of many things I could not comprehend before. I want to resemble You, 0 
Jesus, -You crucified, tortured and humiliated. Jesus, imprint upon my heart and soul Your 
own humility. I love You, Jesus, to the point of madness, You who were crushed with 
suffering as described by the prophet [cf. Isaiah 53:2-9], as if he could not see the human 
form in You because of Your great suffering. It is in this condition, J esus, that I love You to 
the point of madness. 0 eternal and infinite God, what has love done to You?... 



268 October 11, 1933. -Thursday. -I tried to make a Holy Hour, but began it with great difficulty. A 
certain yearning started to tear at my heart. My mind was dimmed so that I could not 
understand the simplest forms of prayer. And so passed by an hour of prayer, or rather of 
struggle. I resolved to pray for a second hour, but my inner sufferings increased-great 
dryness and discouragement. I resolved to pray for a third hour. In the third hour, which I 
resolved to spend kneeling without any support, my body started to clamor for rest. But I in 
no way relented. I stretched out my arms and, though I spoke no words, I persisted by sheer 
will. After a while, I took the ring off my finger and asked J esus to look at the ring, that sign 
of our eternal union, and I offered J esus the feelings I had had on the day of perpetual vows. 
After a while, I feel my heart inundated with a wave of love. A sudden recollection of spirit, 
the senses quiet down, and God's presence pervades my soul. I know only this: that it is 

J esus and I . I saw Him just as He had appeared to me in that instant after my perpetual 
vows, when I was likewise making a Holy Hour. Jesus was suddenly standing before me, 
stripped of His clothes, His body completely covered with wounds, His eyes flooded with tears 
and blood, His face disfigured and covered with spittle. The Lord then said to me, The bride 
must resemble her Betrothed. I understood these words to their very depth. There is no 
room for doubt here. My likeness to Jesus must be through suffering and humility. See what 
love of human souls has done to Me. My daughter, in your heart I find everything 
that so great a number of souls refuses Me. Your heart is My repose. I often wait 
with great graces until towards the end of prayer. 

269 Once, when I had finished a novena to the Holy Spirit for the intention of my confessor 
[Father Sopocko], the Lord answered, I made him known to you even before your 
superiors had sent you here. As you will act towards your confessor, so I will act 
toward you. If you conceal something from him, even though it be the least of My

graces, I too will hide myself from you, and you will remain alone. And so I followed 
God's wish, and a deep peace filled my soul. Now I understand how the Lord defends 
confessors and how He protects them. 

Advice of the Rev. Dr. Sopocko. 

270 Without humility, we cannot be pleasing to God. Practice the third degree of humility;[76i that 
is, not only must one refrain from explaining and defending oneself when reproached with 
something, but one should rejoice at the humiliation. 

If the things you are telling me really come from God, prepare your soul for great suffering. 
You will encounter disapproval and persecution. They will look upon you as a hysteric and an 
eccentric, but the Lord will lavish His graces upon you. True works of God always meet 
opposition and are marked by suffering. If God wants to accomplish something, sooner or 
later He will do so in spite of the difficulties. Your part, in the meantime, is to arm yourself 
with great patience. 

271 When the Rev. Dr. Sopocko went to the Holy Land, Father Dabrowski, S.J ., was the 
community's confessor. During one confession he asked me if I was aware of the high degree 
of [spiritual] life that was present in my soul. I answered that I was aware of it and knew 
what was going on within me. To this the Father replied, "You must not destroy what is going 
on in your soul, Sister, nor must you change anything on your own. It is not in every soul 
that the beautiful gift of a higher interior life is manifest as it is in your case, Sister, for it is 
manifest in an immense degree. Be careful not to waste these great graces of God; a 
great... "[Here the thought breaks off.] 


272 But previously, this priest had put me through many trials. When I told him that the Lord 
wanted these things of me [that is, the painting of the image, the establishing of a feast of 
The Divine Mercy, and the founding of a new community], he laughed at me and told me to 
come to confession at eight in the evening. When I came at eight, a brother was already 
locking the church. When I told him that Father had ordered me to come at that time and 
asked him to let Father know I was there, the good brother went to let him know. Father told 
him to tell me that priests do not hear confessions at that time of day. I returned home 
emptyhanded and did not go to confession to him again, but I made a whole hour's adoration 
and took on certain mortifications for him, that he might obtain light from God in order to 
know souls. But when Father Sopocko left, and he substituted for him, I was forced to go to 
confession to him. Yet, while previously he had been unwilling to acknowledge these inner 
inspirations, he now put me under obligation to be faithful to them. God lets such things 
happen sometimes, but may He be glorified in everything. Still, it requires much grace not to 
falter. 

Annual Retreat. January 10, 1934. 

273 My Jesus, again the moment approaches when I will be alone with You. Jesus, I ask You with 
all my heart, let me know what there is in me that displeases You and also let me know what 
I should do to become more pleasing to You. Do not refuse me this favor and be with me. I 
know that without You, Lord, all my efforts will not amount to much. Oh, how I rejoice at 
Your greatness, O Lord! The more I come to know You, the more ardently I yearn for You 
and sigh after You! 

274 Jesus gave me the grace of knowing myself. In this divine light I see my principal fault; it is 
pride which takes the form of my closing up within myself and of a lack of simplicity in my 
relations with Mother Superior [Irene]. 

The second light concerns speaking. I sometimes talk too much. A thing could be settled in 
one or two words, and as for me, I take too much time about it. But J esus wants me to use 
that time to say some short indulgenced prayers for the souls in purgatory. And the Lord 
says that every word will be weighed on the day of judgment. 

The third light concerns our rules. I have not sufficiently avoided the occasions that lead to 
breaking the rules, especially that of silence. I will act as if the rule were written just for me; 
it should not affect me at all how anyone else might act, as long as I myself act as God 
wishes. 

Resolution. Whatever J esus demands of me regarding external things, I will immediately go 
and tell my superiors. I shall strive for childlike openness and frankness in my relations with 
the superior.

275 Jesus loves hidden souls. A hidden flower is the most fragrant. I must strive to make the 
interior of my soul a resting place for the Heart of Jesus. In difficult and painful moments, 0 
my Creator, I sing You a hymn of trust, for bottomless is the abyss of my trust in You and in 
Your mercy! 

276 From the moment I came to love suffering, it ceased to be a suffering for me. Suffering is the 
daily food of my soul. 



277 I will not speak with a certain person, because I know that Jesus does not like it and that she 
does not profit by it. 

278 At the feet of the Lord. Hidden J esus, Eternal Love, our Source of Life, Divine Madman, in 
that You forget yourself and see only us. Before creating heaven and earth, You carried us in 
the depths of Your Heart. O Love, 0 depth of Your abasement, 0 mystery of happiness, why 
do so few people know You? Why is Your love not returned? O Divine Love, why do You hide 
Your beauty? O Infinite One beyond all understanding, the more I know You the less I 
comprehend You; but because I cannot comprehend You, I better comprehend Your 
greatness. I do not envy the Seraphim their fire, for I have a greater gift deposited in my 
heart. They admire You in rapture, but Your Blood mingles with mine. Love is heaven given 
us already here on earth. Oh, why do You hide in faith? Love tears away the veil. There is no 
veil before the eye of my soul, for You yourself have drawn me into the bosom of secret love 
forever. Praise and glory be to You, O Indivisible Trinity, One God, unto ages of ages! 

279 God made known to me what true love consists in and gave light to me about how, in 
practice, to give proof of it to Him. True love of God consists in carrying out God's will. To 
show God our love in what we do, all our actions, even the least, must spring from our love 
of God. And the Lord said to me, My child, you please Me most by suffering. I n your 
physical as well as your mental sufferings. My daughter, do not seek sympathy 
from creatures. I want the fragrance of your suffering to be pure and 
unadulterated. I want you to detach yourself, not only from creatures, but also 
from yourself. My daughter, I want to delight in the love of your heart, a pure love, 
virginal, unblemished, untarnished. The more you will come to love suffering. My 
daughter, the purer your love for Me will be. 

280 Jesus commanded me to celebrate the Feast of God's Mercy on the first Sunday after Easter. 
[This I did] through interior recollection and exterior mortification, wearing the belt for three 
hours and praying continuously for sinners and for mercy on the whole world. And J esus said 

to me, My eyes rest with pleasure upon this house today. 

281 I feel certain that my mission will not come to an end upon my death, but will begin. O 
doubting souls, I will draw aside for you the veils of heaven to convince you of God's 
goodness, so that you will no longer continue to wound with your distrust the sweetest Heart 
of Jesus. God is Love and Mercy. 

282 Once the Lord said to me, My Heart was moved by great mercy towards you. My 
dearest child, when I saw you torn to shreds because of the great pain you suffered 
in repenting for your sins. I see your love, so pure and true that I give you first 
place among the virgins. You are the honor and glory of My Passion. I see every 
abasement of your soul, and nothing escapes my attention. I lift up the humble 
even to my very throne, because I want it so. 


God, One in the Holy Trinity. 



283 I want to love You as no human soul has ever loved You before; and although I am utterly 
miserable and small, I have nevertheless cast the anchor of my trust deep down into the 
abyss of Your mercy, 0 my God and Creator! In spite of my great misery I fear nothing, but 
hope to sing You a hymn of glory for ever. Let no soul, even the most miserable, fall prey to 
doubt; for, as long as one is alive, each one can become a great saint, so great is the power 
of God's grace. It remains only for us not to oppose God's action. 

284 O Jesus, if only I could become like mist before Your eyes, to cover the earth so that You 
would not see its terrible crimes. Jesus, when I look at the world and its indifference towards 
You, again and again it brings tears to my eyes; but when I look at a cold soul of a religious, 
my heart bleeds. 

285 1934. Once, when I returned to my cell, I was so tired that I had to rest a moment before I

started to undress, and when I was already undressed, one of the sisters asked me to fetch 
her some hot water. Although I was tired, I dressed quickly and brought her the water she 
wanted, even though it was quite a long walk from the cell to the kitchen, and the mud was 
ankle-deep. When I re-entered my cell, I saw the ciborium with the Blessed Sacrament, and 
I heard this voice, Take this ciborium and bring it to the tabernacle. I hesitated at first, 
but when I approached and touched it, I heard these words, Approach each of the sisters 
with the same love with which you approach Me; and whatever you do for them, 
you do it for Me. A moment later, I saw that I was alone. 

286 +Once, after an adoration for our country, a pain pierced my soul, and I began to pray in this 
way: "Most merciful J esus, I beseech You through the intercession of Your Saints, and 
especially the intercession of Your dearest Mother who nurtured You from childhood, bless 
my native land. I beg You, Jesus, look not on our sins, but on the tears of little children, on 
the hunger and cold they suffer. J esus, for the sake of these innocent ones, grant me the 
grace that I am asking of You for my country." At that moment, I saw the Lord J esus, His 
eyes filled with tears, and He said to me, You see. My daughter, what great compassion 

I have for them. Know that it is they who uphold the world. 

287 +My J esus, when I look at this life of souls, I see that many of them serve You with some 
mistrust. At certain times, especially when there is an opportunity to show their love for God, 

I see them running away from the battlefield. And once J esus said to me, Do you, my child, 
also want to act like that? I answered the Lord, "Oh, no, my Jesus, I will not retreat from 
the battlefield, even if mortal sweat breaks out on my brow; I will not let the sword fall from 
my hand until I rest at the feet of the Holy Trinity!" Whatever I do, I do not rely on my own 
strength, but on God's grace. With God's grace a soul can overcome the greatest difficulties. 

288 +Once when I was having a long talk with Jesus about our students, encouraged by His 
kindness, I asked Him, "Do You have among our students any who are a comfort to Your 
Heart?" The Lord answered [that] He has, but their love is weak, and so I put them in 
your special care-pray for them. 

0 great God, I admire Your goodness! You are the Lord of heavenly hosts, and yet You stoop 
so low to Your miserable creatures. Oh, how ardently I desire to love You with every beat of 
my heart! The whole extent of the earth is not enough for me, heaven is too small, and 
boundless space is nothing; You alone are enough for me, Eternal God! You alone can fill the 
depths of my soul. 



289 My happiest moments are when I am alone with my Lord. During these moments I 
experience the greatness of God and my own misery. 

Once, Jesus said to me, Do not be surprised that you are sometimes unjustly accused. 
I myself first drank this cup of undeserved suffering for love of you. 

290 Once, when I was deeply moved by the thought of eternity and its mysteries, my soul 
became fearful; and when I pondered about these a little longer, I started to be troubled by 
various doubts. Then J esus said to me, My child, do not be afraid of the house of your 
Father. Leave these vain inquiries to the wise of this world. I want to see you 
always as a little child. Ask your confessor about everything with simplicity, and I 
will answer you through his lips. 

291 On a certain occasion, I saw a person about to commit a mortal sin. I asked the Lord to send 
me the greatest torments so that that soul could be saved. Then I suddenly felt the terrible 
pain of a crown of thorns on my head. It lasted for quite a long time, but that person 
remained in the Lord's grace. 0 my Jesus, how very easy it is to become holy; all that is 
needed is a bit of good will. If Jesus sees this little bit of good will in the soul, He hurries to 
give himself to the soul, and nothing can stop Him, neither shortcomings nor falls-absolutely 
nothing. Jesus is anxious to help that soul, and if it is faithful to this grace from God, it can 
very soon attain the highest holiness possible for a creature here on earth. God is very 
generous and does not deny His grace to anyone. Indeed He gives more than what we ask of 
Him. Faithfulness to the inspirations of the Holy Spirit-that is the shortest route.

292 +When a soul loves God sincerely, it ought not fear anything in the spiritual life. Let it 
subject itself to the action of grace, and let it not impose any restraints on itself in 
communing with the Lord. 

293 +When Jesus ravished me by His beauty and drew me to Himself, I then saw what in my soul 
was displeasing to Him and made up my mind to remove it, cost what it may; and aided by 
the grace of God I did remove it at once. This magnanimity pleased the Lord, and from that 
moment God started granting me higher graces. In my interior life I never reason; I do not 
analyze the ways in which God's Spirit leads me. It is enough for me to know that I am loved 
and that I love. Pure love enables me to know God and understand many mysteries. My 
confessor is an oracle for me. His word is sacred to me-l am speaking about the spiritual 
director [Father Sopocko]. 

294 +Once the Lord said to me, Act like a beggar who does not back away when he gets 
more alms [than he asked for], but offers thanks the more fervently. You too 
should not back away and say that you are not worthy of receiving greater graces 
when I give them to you. I know you are unworthy, but rejoice all the more and 
take as many treasures from My Heart as you can carry, for then you will please Me 
more. And I will tell you one more thing: Take these graces not only for yourself, 
but also for others; that is, encourage the souls with whom you come in contact to 
trust in My infinite mercy. Oh, how I love those souls who have complete 
confidence in Me. I will do everything for them. 



295 +At that moment Jesus asked me, My child, how is your retreat going? I answered, "But 
J esus, You know how it is going." Yes, I know, but I want to hear it from your own lips 
and from your heart. "0 my Master, when You are leading me, everything goes smoothly, 
and I ask You, Lord, to never leave my side." And J esus said, Yes, I will be with you 
always, if you always remain a little child and fear nothing. As I was your beginning 
here, so I will also be your end. Do not rely on creatures, even in the smallest 
things, because this displeases Me. I want to be alone in your soul. I will give light 
and strength to your soul, and you will learn from My representative that I am in 
you, and your uncertainty will vanish like mist before the rays of the sun. 

296 +0 Supreme Good, I want to love You as no one on earth has ever loved You before! I want 
to adore You with every moment of my life and unite my will closely to Your holy will. My life 
is not drab or monotonous, but it is varied like a garden of fragrant flowers, so that I don't 
know which flower to pick first, the lily of suffering or the rose of love of neighbor or the 
violet of humility. I will not enumerate these treasures in which my every day abounds. It is 
a great thing to know how to make use of the present moment. 

297 +Jesus, Supreme Light, grant me the grace of knowing myself, and pierce my dark soul with 
Your light, and fill the abyss of my soul with Your own self, for You alone [...] 

298 0 my Jesus, the Life, the Way and the Truth, I beg You to keep me close to You as a mother 
holds a baby to her bosom, for I am not only a helpless child, but an accumulation of misery 
and nothingness. 

+The Mystery of the Soul. Vilnius, 1934 

299 When, on one occasion, my confessor told me to ask the Lord J esus the meaning of the two 
rays in the image , lzzi I answered, "Very well, I will ask the Lord." 

During prayer I heard these words within me: The two rays denote Blood and Water. 

The pale ray stands for the Water which makes souls righteous. The red ray stands 
for the Blood which is the life of souls... 

These two rays issued forth from the very depths of My tender mercy when My 
agonized Heart was opened by a lance on the Cross. 

These rays shield souls from the wrath of My Father. Happy is the one who will 
dwell in their shelter, for the just hand of God shall not lay hold of him. I desire 
that the first Sunday after Easter be the Feast of Mercy. 

300 +Ask of my faithful servant [Father Sopocko] that, on this day, he tell the whole 
world of My great mercy; that whoever approaches the Fount of Life on this day will 
be granted complete remission of sins and punishment. 

+ Mankind will not have peace until it turns with trust to My mercy. 

+ Oh, how much I am hurt by a soul's distrust! Such a soul professes that I am Holy

and J ust, but does not believe that I am Mercy and does not trust in My Goodness. 
Even the devils glorify My J ustice but do not believe in My Goodness. 

My Heart rejoices in this title of Mercy. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251 -300 


301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-52] 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1 001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101- 1150 t 1 151-1200 t 1 201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-132 1 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 1450 t 145 1-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 


Notebook 1 


301 Proclaim that mercy is the greatest attribute of God. All the works of My hands are 
crowned with mercy. 

302 +0 Eternal Love, I want all the souls You have created to come to know You. I would like to 
be a priest, for then I would speak without cease about Your mercy to sinful souls drowned in 
despair. I would like to be a missionary and carry the light of faith to savage nations in order 
to make You known to souls, and to be completely consumed for them and to die a martyr's 
death, just as You died for them and for me. O J esus, I know only too well that I can be a 
priest, a missionary, a preacher, and that I can die a martyr's death by completely emptying 
myself and denying myself for love of You, O J esus, and of immortal souls. 

303 Great love can change small things into great ones, and it is only love which lends value to 
our actions. And the purer our love becomes, the less there will be within us for the flames of 
suffering to feed upon, and the suffering will cease to be a suffering for us; it will become a 
delight! By the grace of God, I have received such a disposition of heart that I am never so 
happy as when I suffer for J esus, whom I love with every beat of my heart. 

Once when I was suffering greatly, I left my work and escaped to Jesus and asked Him to 
give me His strength. After a very short prayer I returned to my work filled with enthusiasm 
and joy. Then, one of the sisters [ probably Sister J ustine] said to me, "You must have many 
consolations today, Sister; you look so radiant. Surely, God is giving you no suffering, but 
only consolations." "You are greatly mistaken, Sister," I answered, "for it is precisely when I 
suffer much that my joy is greater; and when I suffer less, my joy also is less." However, 
that soul was letting me recognize that she does not understand what I was saying. I tried to 
explain to her that when we suffer much we have a great chance to show God that we love 
Him; but when we suffer little we have less occasion to show God our love; and when we do 
not suffer at all, our love is then neither great nor pure. By the grace of God, we can attain a 
point where suffering will become a delight to us, for love can work such things in pure souls. 

304 +0 my j esus, my only hope, thank You for the book which You have opened before my soul's 
eyes. That book is Your Passion which You underwent for love of me. It is from this book that 
I have learned how to love God and souls. In this book there are found for us inexhaustible 
treasures. O Jesus, how few souls understand You in Your martyrdom of love! Oh, how great 
is the fire of purest love which burns in Your Most Sacred Heart! Happy the soul that has 
come to understand the love of the Heart of J esus! 

305 It is my greatest desire that souls should recognize You as their eternal happiness, that they 
should come to believe in Your goodness and glorify Your infinite mercy. 



306 I asked the Lord to grant me the grace that my nature be immune and resist the influences 
that sometimes try to draw me away from the spirit of our rule and from the minor 
regulations. These minor transgressions are like little moths that try to destroy the spiritual 
life within us, and they surely will destroy it if the soul is aware of these minor transgressions 
and yet disregards them as small things. I can see nothing that is small in the religious life.

Little matter if I am sometimes the object of vexation and jeers, as long as my spirit remains 
in harmony with the spirit of the rules, the vows and the religious statutes. 

0 my J esus, delight of my heart, You know my desires. I should like to hide from people's 
sight so as to be like one alive and yet not living. I want to live pure as a wild flower; I want 
my love always to be turned to You, just as a flower that is always turning to the sun. I want 
the fragrance and the freshness of the flower of my heart to be always preserved for You 
alone. I want to live beneath Your divine gaze, for You alone are enough for me. When I am 
with You, Jesus, I fear nothing, for nothing can do me harm. 

307 + 1934. Once during Lent, I saw a great light and a great darkness over house and chapel. I 
saw the struggle of these two powers... 

308 1934, Holy Thursday. Jesus said to me, I desire that you make an offering of yourself 
for sinners and especially far those souls who have lost hope in God's mercy. 

God and Souls. An Act of Oblation. 

309 Before heaven and earth, before all the choirs of Angels, before the Most Holy Virgin Mary, 
before all the Powers of heaven, I declare to the One Triune God that today, in union with 
Jesus Christ, Redeemer of souls, I make a voluntary offering of myself for the conversion of 
sinners, especially for those souls who have lost hope in God's mercy. This offering consists 
in my accepting, with total subjection to God's will, all the sufferings, fears and terrors with 
which sinners are filled. In return, I give them all the consolations which my soul receives 
from my communion with God. In a word, I offer everything for them: Holy Masses, Holy 
Communions, penances, mortifications, prayers. I do not fear the blows, blows of divine 
justice, because I am united with Jesus. O my God, in this way I want to make amends to 
You for the souls that do not trust in Your goodness. I hope against all hope in the ocean of 
Your mercy. My Lord and my God, my portion- my portion forever, I do not base this act of 
oblation on my own strength, but on the strength that flows from the merits of Jesus Christ. I 
will daily repeat this act of self-oblation by pronouncing the following prayer which You 
yourself have taught me, Jesus: 

"O Blood and Water which gushed forth from the Heart of Jesus as a Fount of Mercy 
for us, I trust in You!" 

S. M. Faustina of the Blessed Sacrament 

Holy Thursday, during Holy Mass, March 29, 1934. 

310 - I am giving you a share in the redemption of mankind. You are solace in My dying 
hour. 



311 When I received permission from my confessor [Father Sopocko] to make this act of 
oblation, I soon learned that it was pleasing to God, because I immediately began to 
experience its effects. In a moment my soul became like a stone-dried up, filled with torment 
and disquiet. All sorts of blasphemies and curses kept pressing upon my ears. Distrust and 
despair invaded my heart. This is the condition of the poor people, which I have taken upon 
myself. At first, I was very much frightened by these horrible things, but during the first 
[opportune] confession, I was set at peace. 

312 +Once when I went outside the convent to go to confession [St. Michael's Church], I chanced 
upon my confessor [Father Sopocko] saying Mass just then. After a while I saw the Child 
Jesus on the altar, joyfully and playfully holding out His hands to him. But a moment later 
the priest took the beautiful Child into his hands, broke Him up and ate Him alive. At the first 
instant I felt a dislike for the priest for having done this to J esus, but I was immediately 
enlightened in the matter and understood that this priest was very pleasing to God. 

313 +Once, when I was visiting the artist [Eugene Kazimirowski] who was painting the image, 
and saw that it was not as beautiful as Jesus is, I felt very sad about it, but I hid this deep in 
my heart. When we had left the artist's house, Mother Superior [Irene] stayed in town to 
attend to some matters while I returned home alone. I went immediately to the chapel and 
wept a good deal. I said to the Lord, "Who will paint You as beautiful as You are?" Then I 
heard these words: Not in the beauty of the color, nor of the brush lies the greatness 
of this image, but in My grace. 

314 +When I went to the garden one afternoon, my Guardian Angel said to me, "Pray for the

dying." And so I began at once to pray the rosary with the gardeners for the dying. After the 
rosary, we said various prayers for the dying. After the prayers, the wards began to chat 
gayly among themselves. In spite of the noise they were making, I heard these words in my 
soul: "Pray for me!" But as I could not understand these words very well, I moved a few 
steps away from the wards, trying to think who it could be who was asking me to pray. Then 
I heard the words: "I am Sister ...." [781 This sister was in Warsaw while I was, at the time, in 
Vilnius. "Pray for me until I tell you to stop. I am dying." Immediately, I began to pray 
fervently for her, [addressing myself] to the expiring Heart of Jesus. She gave me no respite, 
and I kept praying from three [o'clock] until five. At five, I heard the words: "Thank you!" 
and I understood that she had died. But during Holy Mass on the following day, I continued 
to pray fervently for her soul. In the afternoon, a postcard came saying that Sister ... had 
died at such and such a time. I understood that it was at the same hour when she had said 
to me, "Pray for me." 

315 -FMother of God, Your soul was plunged into a sea of bitterness; look upon Your child and 
teach her to suffer and to love while suffering. Fortify my soul that pain will not break it. 
Mother of grace, teach me to live by [the power of] God. 

316 Once, the Mother of God came to visit me. She was sad. Her eyes were cast down. She made 
it clear that She wanted to say something, and yet, on the other hand, it was as if She did 
not want to speak to me about it. When I understood this, I began to beg the Mother of God 
to tell me and to look at me. Just then Mary looked at me with a warm smile and said, You 
are going to experience certain sufferings because of an illness and the doctors; you will also 
suffer much because of the image, but do not be afraid of anything. The next day I fell ill and 
suffered a great deal, just as the Mother of God had told me. But my soul was ready for the 
sufferings. Suffering is a constant companion of my life. 


317 0 my God, my only hope, I have placed all my trust in You, and I know I shall not be 
disappointed. 

318 I often feel God's presence after Holy Communion in a special and tangible way. I know God 
is in my heart. And the fact that I feel Him in my heart does not interfere with my duties. 

Even when I am dealing with very important matters which require attention, I do not lose 
the presence of God in my soul, and I am closely united with Him. With Him I go to work, 
with Him I go for recreation, with Him I suffer, with Him I rejoice; I live in Him and He in me. 

I am never alone, because He is my constant companion. He is present to me at every 
moment. Our intimacy is very close, through a union of blood and of life. 

319 August 9, 1934. Night adoration on Thursdays. [79i I made my hour of adoration from eleven 
o'clock till midnight. I offered it for the conversion of hardened sinners, especially for those 
who have lost hope in God's mercy. I was reflecting on how much God had suffered and on 
how great was the love He had shown for us, and on the fact that we still do not believe that 
God loves us so much. 0 Jesus, who can understand this? What suffering it is for our Savior! 
How can He convince us of His love if even His death cannot convince us? I called upon the 
whole of heaven to join me in making amends to the Lord for the ingratitude of certain souls. 

320 Jesus made known to me how very pleasing to Him were prayers of atonement. He said to 
me, The prayer of a humble and loving soul disarms the anger of My Father and 
draws down an ocean of blessings. After the adoration, half way to my cell, I was 
surrounded by a , pack of huge black dogs who were jumping and howling and trying to tear 
me to pieces. I realized that they were not dogs, but demons. One of them spoke up in a 
rage, "Because you have snatched so many souls away from us this night, we will tear you to 
pieces." I answered, "If that is the will of the most merciful God, tear me to pieces, for I have 
justly deserved it, because I am the most miserable of all sinners, and God is ever holy, just, 
and infinitely merciful." To these words all the demons answered as one, "Let us flee, for she 
is not alone; the Almighty is with her!" And they vanished like dust, like the noise of the 
road, while I continued on my way to my cell undisturbed, finishing my Te Deum and

pondering the infinite and unfathomable mercy of God. 

August 12, 1934. 

321 A sudden illness- a mortal suffering. It was not death, that is to say, a passing over to real 
life, but a taste of the sufferings of death. Although it gives us eternal life, death is dreadful. 
Suddenly, I felt sick, I gasped for breath, there was darkness before my eyes, my limbs grew 
numb-and there was a terrible suffocation. Even a moment of such suffocation is extremely 
long.... There also comes a strange fear, in spite of trust. I wanted to receive the last 
sacraments, but it was extremely difficult to make a confession even though I desired to do 
so. A person does not know what he is saying; not finishing one thing, he begins another. 

Oh, may God keep every soul from delaying confession until the last hour! I understood the 
great power of the priest's words when they are poured out upon the sick person's soul. 

When I asked my spiritual father whether I was ready to stand before the Lord and whether I 
could be at peace, I received the reply, "You can be completely at peace, not only right now 
but after each weekly confession." Great is the divine grace that accompanies these words of 
the priest. The soul feels power and courage for battle. 


322 0 my Congregation, my mother, how sweet it is to live in you, but it is even better to die in 
you! 

323 After I received the last sacraments, there was a definite improvement. I remained alone. 
This lasted for half an hour and then came another attack; but this one was not so strong, as 
the doctor intervened. 

I united my sufferings with the sufferings of Jesus and offered them for myself and for the 
conversion of souls who do not trust in the goodness of God. Suddenly, my cell was filled 
with black figures full of anger and hatred for me. One of them said, "Be damned, you and 
He who is within you, for you are beginning to torment us even in hell." As soon as I said, 
"And the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us," the figures vanished in a sudden whir. 

324 The next day, I felt very weak, but experienced no further suffering. After Holy Communion, 

I saw the Lord J esus just as I had seen Him during one adoration. The Lord's gaze pierced 
my soul through and through, and not even the least speck of dust escaped His notice. And I 
said to J esus, "J esus, I thought You were going to take me. "And J esus answered, My will 

has not yet been fully accomplished in you; you will still remain on earth, but not 
for long. I am well pleased with your trust, but your love should be more ardent. 
Pure love gives the soul strength at the very moment of dying. When I was dying 
on the cross, I was not thinking about Myself, but about poor sinners, and I prayed 
for them to My Father. I want your last moments to be completely similar to Mine 
on the cross. There is but one price at which souls are bought, and that is suffering 
united to My suffering on the cross. Pure love understands these words; carnal love 
will never understand them. 

325 1934. On the day of the Assumption of the Mother of God, I did not assist at Holy Mass. The 
woman doctonsoi did not allow me; but I prayed fervently in my cell. After a short time, I 
saw the Mother of God, unspeakably beautiful. She said to me, My daughter, what I demand 
from you is prayer, prayer, and once again prayer, for the world and especially for your 
country. For nine days receive Holy Communion in atonement and unite yourself closely to 
the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. During these nine days you will stand before God as an 
offering; always and everywhere, at all times and places, day or night, whenever you wake 
up, pray in the spirit. I n spirit, one can always remain in prayer. 

326 Once, Jesus said to me, My gaze from this image is like My gaze from the cross. 

327 Once, my confessor [Father Sopocko] asked me where the inscription should be placed, 
because there was not enough space in the picture for everything. I answered, "I will pray 
and give you an answer next week." When I left the confessional and was passing before the 
Blessed Sacrament, I received an inner understanding about the inscription. Jesus reminded 
me of what He had told me the first time; namely, that these three words must be clearly in 
evidence: "Jesus, I trust in You. "["Jezu, Ufam Tobie.'] I understood that Jesus wanted the 
whole formula to be there, but He gave no direct orders to this effect as He did for these 
three words.

I am offering people a vessel with which they are to keep coming for graces to the 
fountain of mercy. That vessel is this image with the signature: "Jesus, I trust in 
You." 


328 O purest Love, rule in all Your plenitude in my heart and help me to do Your holy will most 
faithfully! 

329 Toward the end of a three-day retreat, I saw myself walking along a rough path. I kept 
stumbling continually, and I saw following me the figure of a person who kept supporting me. 

I was not happy with this and asked the person to leave me alone, as I wanted to walk on 
my own. But the figure, whom I could not recognize, did not leave me for a moment. I got 
impatient and turned around and pushed the person away from me. At that moment I saw 
that it was Mother Superior [Irene], and at the same moment I saw that it was not Mother 
Superior, but the Lord J esus who looked deeply into me and gave me to understand how 
painful it was to Him when I did not, even in the smallest things, do my superior's will, which 
is My will, [He said]. I asked pardon of the Lord and took the warning very much to heart. 

330 +Once, the confessor told me to pray for his intention, and I began a novena to the Mother 
of God. This novena consisted in the prayer, "Hail, Holy Queen," recited nine times. Toward 
the end of the novena I saw the Mother of God with the I nfant J esus in Her arms, and I also 
saw my confessor kneeling at Her feet and talking with Her. I did not understand what he 
was saying to Her, because I was busy talking with the Infant Jesus, who came down from 
His Mother's arms and approached me. I could not stop wondering at His beauty. I heard a 
few of the words that the Mother of God spoke to him [i.e., my confessor] but not 
everything. The words were: / am not only the Queen of Heaven, but also the Mother of 
Mercy and your Mother. And at that moment She stretched out her right hand, in which She 
was clasping her mantle, and She covered the priest with it. At that moment, the vision 
vanished. 

331 Oh, how great a grace it is to have a spiritual director! One makes more rapid progress in 
virtue, sees the will of God more clearly, fulfills it more faithfully, and follows a road that is 
sure and free of dangers. The director knows how to avoid the rocks against which the soul 
could be shattered. The Lord gave me this grace rather late, to be sure, but I rejoice in it 
greatly, seeing how God inclines His will to my director's wishes. I will mention just one 
incident out of a thousand that have happened to me. As I usually do, I asked the Lord Jesus 
one evening to give me the points for next day's meditation. I received the answer: Meditate 
on the Prophet J onah and his mission. I thanked the Lord, but began to think within myself of 
how different that subject was from the others. But with all my soul I strove to meditate 
about it, and I recognized myself in the person of the prophet, in the sense that often I, too, 
try to make excuses to the Lord, claiming that someone else would do His holy will better 
[than I could], and not understanding that God can do all things and that His omnipotence 
will be all the more manifest if the tool is poorer. God made this clear to me in the following 
way. That afternoon, there was confession for the community. When I presented to the 
director of my soul the fear that seized me because of this mission for which God was using 
me, clumsy tool that I was, my spiritual father answered that, willing or not, we must carry 
out the will of God, and he gave me the Prophet J onah as an example. After the confession, I 
wondered how the confessor knew that God had told me to meditate about J onah; surely I 
myself had not told him. Then I heard these words: When the priest acts in my place, he 
does not act of himself, but I act through him. His wishes are Mine. I can see how 
Jesus defends His representatives. He himself enters into their actions. 



332 +Thursday. When I started the Holy Hour, I wanted to immerse myself in the agony of Jesus 
in the Garden of Olives. Then I heard a voice in my soul: Meditate on the mystery of the 
Incarnation . And suddenly the Infant Jesus appeared before me, radiant with beauty. He 
told me how much God is pleased with simplicity in a soul. Although My greatness is 
beyond understanding, I commune only with those who are little. I demand of you 
a childlike spirit.

333 I now see clearly how God acts through the confessor and how faithfully He keeps His 
promises. Two weeks ago, my confessor told me to reflect upon this spiritual childhood. It 
was somewhat difficult at first, but my confessor, disregarding my difficulties, told me to 
continue to reflect upon spiritual childhood. "In practice, this spiritual childhood," [he said,] 
"should manifest itself in this way: a child does not worry about the past or the future, but 
makes use of the present moment. I want to emphasize that spiritual childlikeness in you, 
Sister, and I place great stress upon it." I can see how God bows down to my confessor's 
wishes; He does not show himself to me at this time as a Teacher in the fullness of His 
strength and human adulthood, but as a little Child. The God who is beyond all understanding 
stoops to me under the appearance of a little Child. 

334 But the eye of my soul does not stop at this appearance. Although You take the form of a 
little Child, I see in You the immortal, infinite Lord of lords, whom pure spirits adore, day and 
night, and for whom the hearts of the Seraphim burn with the fire of purest love. O Christ, 0 
J esus, I want to surpass them in my love for You! I apologize to you, 0 pure spirits, for my 
boldness in comparing myself to you. I, this chasm of misery, this abyss of misery; and You, 
O God, who are the incomprehensible abyss of mercy, swallow me up as the heat of the sun 
swallows up a drop of dew! A loving look from You will fill up any abyss. I feel immensely 
happy at the greatness of God. Seeing God's greatness is more than enough to make me 
happy throughout all eternity! 

335 Once, when I saw J esus in the form of a small child, I asked, "J esus, why do you now take on 
the form of a child when You commune with me? I n spite of this, I still see in You the infinite 
God, my Lord and Creator. Jesus replied that until I learned simplicity and humility, He would 
commune with me as a little child. 

336 +1934. During Holy Mass, when the Lord Jesus was exposed in the Blessed Sacrament, 
before Holy Communion I saw two rays coming out from the Blessed Host, just as they are 
painted in the image, one of them red and the other pale. And they were reflected on each of 
the sisters and wards, but not on all in the same way. On some of them the rays were barely 
visible. It was the last day of the children's retreat. 

337 November 22, 1934. +On one occasion, my spiritual director [Father Sopocko] told me to 
look carefully into myself and to examine whether I had any attachment to some particular 
object or creature, or even to myself, or whether I engaged in useless chatter, "for all these 
things," [he said,] "get in the way of the Lord J esus, who wants