 the chapel to say goodnight to the Lord before retiring, and apologized for 
having talked so little to Him when I was at home, I heard a voice within my soul, I am very 
pleased that you had not been talking with Me, but were making My goodness 
known to souls and rousing them to love Me. 

405 Mother Superior [ Mary J oseph] said to me, "We are both going to J ozefinek tomorrow, Sister, 
and you will have a chance to talk with Mother General [Michael]." I was delighted. Mother 
General was ever the same, full of goodness, peace and the Spirit of God. I had a long talk 
with her. We attended the afternoon service. The Litany of the Sacred Heart of Jesus was 
sung. The Lord Jesus was exposed in the monstrance. 

406 After a short while, I saw the little J esus, who came out from the Host and rested in my 
hands. This lasted for a moment; immense joy flooded my soul. The Child Jesus had the 
same appearance as He had the time we entered the Chapel with Mother Superior-my former 
Directress, Mary Joseph. The next day I was already back in my beloved Vilnius. 

407 Oh, how happy I felt to be back in our convent! I felt as though I was entering the convent 
for the second time. I took unending delight in the silence and peace in which the soul can so 
easily immerse itself in God, helped by everyone and disturbed by no one. 

The Great Lent 

408 When I become immersed in the Lord's Passion, I often see the Lord Jesus, during adoration, 
in this manner: after the scourging, the torturers took the Lord and stripped Him of His own 
garment, which had already adhered to the wounds; as they took it off, His wounds 
reopened; then they threw a dirty and tattered scarlet cloak over the fresh wounds of the 
Lord. The cloak, in some places, barely reached His knees. They made Him sit on a piece of 
beam. And then they wove a crown of thorns, which they put on His sacred head. They put a 
reed in His hand and made fun of Him, bowing to Him as to a king. Some spat in His face, 
while others took the reed and struck Him on the head with it. Others caused him pain by 
slapping Him; still others covered His face and struck Him with their fists. Jesus bore all this 
with meekness. Who can comprehend Him-comprehend His suffering? Jesus' eyes were 
downcast. I sensed what was happening in the most sweet Heart of Jesus at that time. Let 
every soul reflect on what Jesus was suffering at that moment. They tried to outdo each 
other in insulting the Lord. I reflected: Where does such malice in man come from? It is 
caused by sin. Love and sin have met. 

409 When I was attending Mass in a certain church with another sister, I felt the greatness and 
majesty of God; I felt the church was permeated by God. His majesty enveloped me and, 
though it terrified me, it filled me with peace and joy. I knew that nothing could oppose His 
will. Oh, if only all souls knew who is living in our churches, there would not be so many

outrages and so much disrespect in these holy places! 



410 0 eternal and incomprehensible Love, I beg You for one grace: enlighten my mind with light 
from on high; help me to know and appreciate all things according to their value. I feel the 
greatest joy in my soul when I come to know the truth. 

411 March 21, 1935. Often during Mass, I see the Lord in my soul; I feel His presence which 
pervades my being. I sense His divine gaze; I have long talks with Him without saying a 
word; I know what His divine Heart desires, and I always do what will please Him the most. 1 
love Him to distraction, and I feel that I am being loved by God. At those times when I meet 
with God deep within myself, I feel so happy that I do not know how to express it. Such 
moments are short, for the soul could not bear it for long, as separation from the body would 
be inevitable. Though these moments are very short, their power, however, which is 
transmitted to the soul, remains with it for a very long time. Without the least effort, I 
experience the profound recollection which then envelops me-and it does not diminish even if 
I talk with people, nor does it interfere with the performance of my duties. I feel the constant 
presence of God without any effort of my soul. I know that I am united with Him as closely 
as a drop of water is united with the bottomless ocean. 

Last Thursday, toward the end of my prayers, I felt this grace, and it lasted for an unusually 
long time, for it was throughout Mass, so that I thought I would die of joy. At such times, my 
knowledge of God and His attributes becomes more acute, and also I know my own self and 
my misery much better. I am amazed at the Lord's great condescension to such a miserable 
soul as mine. After Holy Mass, I felt completely immersed in God and am still conscious of 
His every glance into the depth of my heart. About midday I entered the chapel for a 
moment, 1 and again the power of grace struck my heart. As I continued in a state of 
recollection, Satan took a flowerpot and angrily hurled it to the ground with all his might. I 
saw all his rage and his jealousy. 

412 There was no one in the chapel, so I got up, picked up the pieces of the flowerpot, repotted 
the flower and tried to do all this before anyone came in. But I did not manage to do so, as 
Mother Superior [Borgia] came in at that moment together with the sister sacristan [93i and 
several other sisters. Mother Superior was surprised that I had been touching something on 
the altar and thus caused the flowerpot to fall. Sister sacristan showed her displeasure, and I 
did my best not to explain or excuse myself. But towards evening I felt very exhausted and 
could not make my Holy Hour, so I asked Mother Superior to allow me to go to bed early. I 
fell asleep as soon as I lay down, but at about eleven o'clock Satan shook my bed. I awoke 
instantly, and I started to pray peacefully to my Guardian Angel. Then I saw the souls who 
were doing penance in purgatory. They appeared like shadows, and among them I saw many 
demons. One of these tried to vex me; taking the form of a cat, he kept throwing himself 
onto my bed and on my feet, and he was quite heavy, as if [weighing] a ton. 

I kept praying the rosary all the while, and toward dawn these beings vanished, and I was 
able to get some sleep. When I entered the chapel in the morning I heard a voice in my soul, 

You are united to Me; fear nothing. But know, my child, that Satan hates you; he 
hates every soul, but he burns with a particular hatred for you, because you have 
snatched so many souls from his dominion. 


Holy Thursday, April 18. 


413 This morning I heard these words: From today until the [celebration of the] 
Resurrection, you will not feel My presence, but your soul will be filled with great 
longing. And immediately a great longing filled my soul; I felt a separation from my beloved 
Jesus, and when the moment for Holy Communion came, I saw the suffering Face of Jesus in 
every Host [contained] in the chalice. From that moment, I felt a more intense yearning in 
my heart. 

414 On Good Friday, at three o'clock in the afternoon, when I entered the chapel, I heard these 
words: I desire that the image be publicly honored. Then I saw the Lord Jesus dying on 
the Cross amidst great suffering, and out of the Heart of J esus came the same two rays as 
are in the image.

415 Saturday. During Vespers I saw the Lord J esus radiant as the sun, in a bright garment, and 
He said to me, May your heart be joyful. And great joy flooded me, and I was penetrated 
with God's presence, which for the soul is a treasure beyond words. 

416 When the image was displayed , imi I saw a sudden movement of the hand of J esus, as He 
made a large sign of the cross. In the evening of the same day, when I had gone to bed, I 
saw the image going over the town, and the town was covered with what appeared to be a 
mesh and nets. As J esus passed, He cut through all the nets and finally made a large sign of 
the cross and disappeared. I saw myself surrounded by a multitude of malicious figures 
burning with hatred for me. Various threats came from their lips, but none of them touched 
me. After a moment, this apparition vanished, but for a long time I could not get to sleep. 

417 [April] 26. On Friday, when I was at Ostra Brama to attend the ceremony during which the 
image was displayed, I heard a sermon given by my confessor [Father Sopocko]. This 
sermon about Divine Mercy was the first of the things that J esus had asked for so very long 
ago. When he began to speak about the great mercy of the Lord, the image came alive and 
the rays pierced the hearts of the people gathered there, but not all to the same degree. 
Some received more, some less. Great joy filled my soul to see the grace of God. 

Then I heard the words. You are a witness of My mercy. You shall stand before My 
throne forever as a living witness to My mercy. 

418 When the sermon was over, I did not wait for the end of the service, as I was in a hurry to 
get back home. When I had taken a few steps, a great multitude of demons blocked my way. 
They threatened me with terrible tortures, and voices could be heard: "She has snatched 
away everything we have worked for over so many years!" When I asked them, "Where have 
you come from in such great numbers?" the wicked forms answered, "Out of human hearts; 
stop tormenting us!" 

419 Seeing their great hatred for me, I immediately asked my Guardian Angel for help, and at 
once the bright and radiant figure of my Guardian Angel appeared and said to me, "Do not 
fear, spouse of my Lord; without His permission these spirits will do you no harm." 
Immediately the evil spirits vanished, and the faithful Guardian Angel accompanied me, in a 
visible manner, right to the very house. His look was modest and peaceful, and a flame of 
fire sparkled from his forehead. 0 Jesus, I would like to toil and wear myself out and suffer 
all my life for that one moment in which I saw Your glory, 0 Lord, and profit for souls. 


Sunday, [April] 28, 1935. 


420 Low Sunday; that is, the Feast of The Divine Mercy, the conclusion of the J ubilee of 
Redemption. When we went to take part in the celebrations, my heart leapt with joy that the 
two solemnities were so closely united. I asked God for mercy on the souls of sinners. 

Toward the end of the service, when the priest took the Blessed Sacrament to bless the 
people, I saw the Lord Jesus as He is represented in the image. The Lord gave His blessing, 
and the rays extended over the whole world. Suddenly, I saw an impenetrable brightness in 
the form of a crystal dwelling place, woven together from waves of a brilliance 
unapproachable to both creatures and spirits. Three doors led to this resplendence. At that 
moment, Jesus, as He is represented in the image, entered this resplendence through the 
second door to the Unity within. It is a triple Unity, which is incomprehensible-which is 
infinity. I heard a voice, This Feast emerged from the very depths of My mercy, and it is 
confirmed in the vast depths of My tender mercies. Every soul believing and trusting in My 
mercy will obtain it. I was overjoyed at the immense goodness and greatness of my God. 

April 29, 1935. 

421 On the eve of the exposition of the image, I went with our Mother Superior to visit our 
confessor [Father Sopocko]. When the conversation touched upon the image, the confessor 
asked for one of the sisters to help make some wreaths. Mother Superior replied, "Sister 
Faustina will help." I was delighted at this, and when we returned home, I immediately set 
about preparing some greens, and with the help of one of our wards brought them over. 
Another person, who works at the church, also helped. Everything was ready by seven

o'clock that evening, and the image was already hanging in its place. However, some ladies 
saw me standing around there, for I was more a bother than a help, and on the next day 
they asked the sisters what this beautiful image was and what was its significance. Surely 
these sisters would know, [they thought] as one of them had helped adorn it the day before. 
The sisters were very surprised as they knew nothing about it; they all wanted to see it and 
immediately they began to suspect me. They said, "Sister Faustina must certainly know all 
about it." 

When they began asking me, I was silent, since I could not tell the truth. My silence 
increased their curiosity, and I was even more on my guard not to tell a lie and not to tell the 
truth, since I had no permission [to do so]. Then they started to show their displeasure and 
reproached me openly saying, "How is it that outsiders know about this and we, nothing?" 
Various judgments were being made about me. I suffered much for three days, but a special 
power took over in my soul. I was happy to suffer for God and for the souls that have been 
granted His mercy during these days. Seeing that so many souls have been granted divine 
mercy these days, I regard as nothing even the greatest suffering and toil, even if they were 
to continue till the end of the world; for they will come to an end, while these souls have 
been saved from torments that are without end. It was a great joy for me to see others 
returning to the source of happiness, the bosom of The Divine Mercy. 

422 Seeing Father Sopocko's sacrifice and efforts for this work, I admired his patience and 
humility. This all cost a great deal, not only in terms of toil and various troubles, but also of 
money; and Father Sopocko was taking care of all the expenses. I can see that Divine 
Providence had prepared him to carry out this work of mercy before I had asked God for this. 
Oh, how strange are Your ways, 0 God! And how happy are the souls that follow the call of 
divine grace! 



423 Praise the Lord, my soul, for everything, and glorify His mercy, for His goodness is without 
end. Everything will pass, but His mercy is without limit or end. And although evil will attain 
its measure, in mercy there is no measure. 

O my God, even in the punishments You send down upon the earth I see the abyss of Your 
mercy, for by punishing us here on earth You free us from eternal punishment. Rejoice, all 
you creatures, for you are closer to God in His infinite mercy than a baby to its mother's 
heart. 0 God, You are compassion itself for the greatest sinners who sincerely repent. The 
greater the sinner, the greater his right to God's mercy. 

A Certain Moment, May 12, 1935 

424 In the evening, I just about got into bed, and I fell asleep immediately. Though I fell asleep 
quickly, I was awakened even more quickly. A little child came and woke me up. The child 
seemed about a year old, and I was surprised it could speak so well, as children of that age 
either do not speak or speak very indistinctly The child was beautiful beyond words and 
resembled the Child J esus, and he said to me, Look at the sky. And when I looked at the 
sky I saw the stars and the moon shining. Then the child asked me, Do you see this moon 
and these stars? When I said yes, he spoke these words to me, These stars are the 
souls of faithful Christians, and the moon is the souls of religious. Do you see how 
great the difference is between the light of the moon and the light of the stars? 

Such is the difference in heaven between the soul of a religious and the soul of a 
faithful Christian. And he went on to say that, True greatness is in loving God and in 
humility. 

425 Then I saw a soul which was being separated from its body amid great torment. 0 Jesus, as I 
am about to write this, I tremble at the sight of the horrible things that bear witness against 
him.... I saw the souls of little children and those of older ones, about nine years of age, 
emerging from some kind of a muddy abyss. The souls were foul and disgusting, resembling 
the most terrible monsters and decaying corpses. But the corpses were living and gave loud 
testimony against the dying soul. And the soul I saw dying was a soul full of the world's 
applause and honors, the end of which are emptiness and sin. Finally a woman came out who 
was holding something like tears in her apron, and she witnessed very strongly against him.

426 O terrible hour, at which one is obliged to see all one's deeds in their nakedness and misery; 
not one of them is lost, they will all accompany us to God's judgment. I can find no words or 
comparisons to express such terrible things. And although it seems to me that this soul is not 
damned, nevertheless its torments are in no way different from the torments of hell; there is 
only this difference: that they will someday come to an end. 

427 A moment later, I again saw the child who had awakened me. It was of wondrous beauty and 
repeated these words to me, True greatness of the soul is in loving God and in 
humility. I asked the child, "How do you know that true greatness of the soul is in loving 
God and in humility? Only theologians know about such things and you haven't even learned 
the catechism. So how do you know?" To this he answered, I know; I know all things. And 
with that, He disappeared. 



428 But I could no longer get to sleep; my mind became exhausted by thinking about the things I 
had seen. O human souls, how late you learn the truth! 0 abyss of God's mercy, pour 
yourself out as quickly as possible over the whole world, according to what You yourself have 
said. 

May, 1935. A Certain Moment. 

429 When I became aware of God's great plans for me, I was frightened at their greatness and 
felt myself quite incapable of fulfilling them, and I began to avoid interior conversations with 
Him, filling up the time with vocal prayer. I did this out of humility, but I soon recognized it 
was not true humility, but rather a great temptation from the devil. When, on one occasion, 
instead of interior prayer, I took up a book of spiritual reading, I heard these words spoken 
distinctly and forcefully within my soul, You will prepare the world for My final coming. 
These words moved me deeply, and although I pretended not to hear them, 1 understood 
them very well and had no doubt about them. Once, being tired out from this battle of love 
with God, and making constant excuses on the grounds that I was unable to carry out this 
task, I wanted to leave the chapel, but some force held me back and I found myself 
powerless. Then I heard these words, You intend to leave the chapel, but you shall not 
get away from Me, for I am everywhere. You cannot do anything of yourself, but 
with me you can do all things. 

430 When, in the the course of the week, I went to see my confessor [Father Sopocko], and 
revealed the condition of my soul to him, especially the fact that I was avoiding interior 
conversation with God, I was told that I must not shrink from interior conversation with God, 
but should listen intently to the words He speaks to me. 

431 I followed my confessor's advice, and at the first meeting with the Lord, I fell at Jesus' feet 
and, with a griefstricken heart, apologized for everything. Then Jesus lifted me up from the 
ground and sat me beside Him and let me put my head on His breast, so that I could better 
understand and feel the desires of His most sweet Heart. Then He spoke these words to me, 

My daughter, have fear of nothing; I am always with you. All your adversaries will 
harm you only to the degree that I permit them to do so. You are my dwelling place 
and my constant repose. For your sake I will withhold the hand which punishes; for 
your sake I bless the earth. 

432 At that very moment, I felt some kind of fire in my heart. I feel my senses deadening and 
have no idea of what is going on around me. I feel the Lord's gaze piercing me through and 
through. I am very much aware of His greatness and my misery. An extraordinary suffering 
pervades my soul, together with a joy I cannot compare to anything. I feel powerless in the 
embrace of God. I feel that I am in Him and that I am dissolved in Him like a drop of water in 
the ocean. I cannot express what takes place within me; after such interior prayer, I feel 
strength and power to practice the most difficult virtues. I feel dislike for all things that the 
world holds in esteem. With all my soul I desire silence and solitude. 


433 May, 1935. During Forty Hours' Devotion I saw the face of the Lord J esus in the Sacred Host 
which was exposed in the monstrance. Jesus was looking with kindness at everyone. 



434 I often see the Child J esus during Holy Mass. He is extremely beautiful. He appears to be 
about one year old. Once, when I saw the same Child during Mass in our chapel, I was seized

with a violent desire and an irresistible longing to approach the altar and take the Child 
Jesus. At that moment, the Child Jesus was standing by me on the side of my kneeler, and 
He leaned with His two little hands against my shoulder, gracious and joyful, His look deep 
and penetrating. But when the priest broke the Host, Jesus was once again on the altar, and 
was broken and consumed by the priest. 

After Holy Communion, I saw Jesus in the same way in my heart and felt Him physically in 
my heart throughout the day. Unconsciously, a most profound recollection took possession of 
me, and I did not exchange a word with anyone. I avoided people as much as I could, always 
answering questions regarding my duties, but beyond that, not a word. 

June 9, 1935. Pentecost. 

435 As I was walking in the garden in the evening, I heard these words: By your entreaties, 
you and your companions shall obtain mercy for yourselves and for the world. I 

understood that I would not remain in the Congregation in which I am at the present 
time. [95i I saw clearly that God's will regarding me was otherwise. But 1 kept making excuses 
before God, telling Him that I was unable to carry out this task. "Jesus, You know very well 
what I am" [I said], and I started enumerating my weaknesses to the Lord, hiding behind 
them so that He would agree that I was unable to carry out His plans. Then I heard these 
words: Do not fear; I myself will make up for everything that is lacking in you. But 
these words penetrated me to my depths and made me even more aware of my misery, and 
I understood that the word of the Lord is living and that it penetrates to the very depths. I 
understood that God demands a more perfect way of life of me. However, I kept using my 
incompetence as an excuse. 

436 June 29, 1935. When I talked to my spiritual director [Father Sopocko] about various things 
that the Lord was asking of me, I thought he would tell me that I was incapable of 
accomplishing all those things, and that the Lord Jesus did not use miserable souls like me 
for the works He wanted done. But I heard words [to the effect] that it was just such souls 
that God chooses most frequently to carry out His plans. This priest is surely guided by the 
Spirit of God; he has penetrated the secrets of my soul, the deepest secrets which were 
between me and God, about which I had not yet spoken to him, because I had not 
understood them myself, and the Lord had not clearly ordered me to tell him. The secret is 
this: God demands that there be a Congregation which will proclaim the mercy of God to the 
world and, by its prayers, obtain it for the world. When the priest asked me if I had not had 
any such inspirations, I replied that I had not had any clear orders; but at that instant a light 
penetrated my soul, and I understood that the Lord was speaking through him. 

437 In vain had I defended myself by saying I had not received any clear orders, for at the end of 
our conversation I saw the Lord Jesus on the threshold, as He is represented in the image, 
and He said to me, I desire that there be such a Congregation.LMi This lasted only a 
moment. Yet I did not tell him about it right away, as I was in a hurry to get back home, and 
I kept repeating to the Lord, "I am unable to carry out Your plans, 0 Lord!" But, strangely 
enough, Jesus paid no attention to my appeals, but gave me to see and understand how 
pleasing this work was to Him. He took no account of my weakness, but gave me to know 
how many difficulties I must overcome. And I, His poor creature, could say nothing but "I am 
incapable of it, 0 my God!" 


438 J une 30, 1935. At the very beginning of Holy Mass on the following day, I saw J esus in all His 
unspeakable beauty. He said to me that He desired that such a Congregation be founded 
as soon as possible, and you shall live in it together with your companions. My 
Spirit shall be the rule of your life. Your life is to be modeled on Mine, from the crib 
to My death on the Cross. Penetrate My mysteries, and you will know the abyss of 
My mercy towards creatures and My unfathomable goodness-and this you shall 
make known to the world. Through your prayers, you shall mediate between 
heaven and earth. 

439 Then came the moment to receive Holy Communion, and J esus disappeared, and I saw a 
great brightness. Then I heard these words: We give Our blessing, and at that moment a

bright ray issued from that light and pierced my heart; an extraordinary fire was enkindled in 
my soul-1 thought I would die of joy and happiness. I felt the separation of my spirit from my 
body. I felt totally immersed in God, I felt I was snatched up by the Almighty, like a particle 
of dust, into unknown expanses. 

Trembling with joy in the embrace of the Creator, I felt He himself was supporting me so that 
I could bear this great happiness and gaze at His Majesty. I know now that, if He himself had 
not first strengthened me by His grace, my soul would not have been able to bear the 
happiness, and I would have died in an instant. Holy Mass came to an end I know not when, 
for it was beyond my power to pay attention to what was going on in the chapel. But when I 
recovered my senses, I felt the strength and courage to do God's will; nothing seemed 
difficult to me; and whereas I had previously been making excuses to the Lord, I now felt the 
Lord's courage and strength within me, and I said to the Lord, "I am ready for every beck 
and call of Your will!" I nteriorly, I had gone through everything that I war going to 
experience in the future. 

440 0 my Creator and Lord, my entire being is Yours! Dispose of me according to Your divine 
pleasure and according to Your eternal plans and Your unfathomable mercy. May every soul 
know how good the Lord is; may no soul fear to commune intimately with the Lord; may no 
soul use unworthiness as an excuse, and may it never postpone [accepting] God's 
invitations, for that is not pleasing to the Lord. There is no soul more wretched than I am, as 
I truly know myself, and I am astounded that divine Majesty stoops so low. 0 eternity, it 
seems to me that you are too short to extol [adequately] the infinite mercy of the Lord! 

441 Once, the image was being exhibited over the altar during the Corpus Christi procession 
[June 20, 1935]. When the priest exposed the Blessed Sacrament, and the choir began to 
sing, the rays from the image pierced the Sacred Host and spread out all over the world. 

Then I heard these words: These rays of mercy will pass through you, just as they 
have passed through this Host, and they will go out through all the world. At these 
words, profound joy invaded my soul. 

442 Once when my confessor [Father Sopocko] was saying Mass, I saw, as usual, the Child Jesus 
on the altar, from the time of the Offertory. However, a moment before the Elevation, the 
priest vanished from my sight, and J esus alone remained. When the moment of the Elevation 
approached, Jesus took the Host and the chalice in His little hands and raised them together, 
looking up to heaven, and a moment later I again saw my confessor. I asked the Child Jesus 
where the priest had been during the time I had not seen him. J esus answered, I n My 
Heart. But I could not understand anything more of these words of Jesus. 



443 On one occasion I heard these words, I desire that you live according to My will, in the 
most secret depths of your soul. I reflected on these words, which spoke very much to 
my heart. This was on the day of confessions for the community. When I went to confession 
and had accused myself of my sins, the priest [Father Sopocko] repeated to me the same 
words that the Lord had previously spoken. 

444 The priest spoke these profound words to me, "There are three degrees in the 
accomplishment of God's will: in the first, the soul carries out all rules and statutes 
pertaining to external observance; in the second degree, the soul accepts interior inspirations 
and carries them out faithfully; in the third degree, the soul, abandoned to the will of God, 
allows Him to dispose of it freely, and God does with it as He pleases, and it is a docile tool in 
His hands." And the priest said that I was at the second degree in the accomplishment of 
God's will and that I had not yet reached the third degree, but that I should strive to attain 

it. These words pierced my soul. I see clearly that God often gives the priest knowledge of 
what is going on in the depths of my soul. This does not surprise me at all; indeed, I thank 
God that He has such chosen persons. 

Thursday, Nocturnal Adoration. 

445 When I came for adoration, an inner recollection took hold of me immediately, and I saw the 
Lord Jesus tied to a pillar, stripped of His clothes, and the scourging began immediately. I

saw four men who took turns at striking the Lord with scourges. My heart almost stopped at 
the sight of these tortures. The Lord said to me, I suffer even greater pain than that 
which you see. And J esus gave me to know for what sins He subjected himself to the 
scourging: these are sins of impurity. Oh, how dreadful was Jesus' moral suffering during the 
scourging! Then Jesus said to me, Look and see the human race in its present 
condition. In an instant, I saw horrible things: the executioners left Jesus, and other people 
started scourging Him; they seized the scourges and struck the Lord mercilessly. These were 
priests, religious men and women; and high dignitaries of the Church, which surprised me 
greatly. There were lay people of all ages and walks of life. All vented their malice on the 
innocent J esus. Seeing this, my heart fell as if into a mortal agony. And while the 
executioners had been scourging Him, Jesus had been silent and looking into the distance; 
but when those other souls I mentioned scourged Him, Jesus closed His eyes, and a soft, but 
most painful moan escaped from His Heart. And Jesus gave me to know in detail the gravity 
of the malice of these ungrateful souls: You see, this is a torture greater than My death. Then 
my lips too fell silent, and I began to experience the agony of death, and I felt that no one 
would comfort me or snatch me from that state but the One who had put me into it. Then the 
Lord said to me, I see the sincere pain of your heart which brought great solace to 
My Heart. See and take comfort. 



446 Then I saw the Lord J esus nailed to the cross. When He had hung on it for a while, I saw a 
multitude of souls crucified like Him. Then I saw a second multitude of souls, and a third. The 
second multitude were not nailed to [their] crosses, but were holding them firmly in their 
hands. The third were neither nailed to [their] crosses nor holding them firmly in their hands, 
but were dragging [their] crosses behind them and were discontent. Jesus then said to me, 
Do you see these souls? Those who are like Me in the pain and contempt they suffer 
will be like Me also in glory. And those who resemble Me less in pain and contempt 
will also bear less resemblance to Me in glory. 

Among the crucified souls, the most numerous were those of the clergy. I also saw some 
crucified souls whom I knew, and this gave me great joy. Then J esus said to me, I n your 
meditation tomorrow, you shall think about what you have seen today. And 

immediately J esus disappeared on me. 

447 Friday. I was ill and could not attend Holy Mass. At seven o'clock in the morning I saw my 
confessor celebrating Holy Mass, during which I saw the Child Jesus. Toward the end of Mass, 
the vision disappeared, and I found myself back in my cell as before. I ndescribable joy took 
hold of me because, although I could not go to Mass in our own chapel, I had assisted at it in 
a church which was far distant. Jesus has a remedy for everything. 

J uly 30, 1935. August 5, 1935. The Feast of Our Lady of Mercy. 

448 Feast of St. Ignatius. I prayed fervently to this Saint, reproaching him for looking on and not 
coming to my aid in such important matters as doing the will of God. I said to him, "You, our 
Patron, who were inflamed with the fire of love and zeal for the greater glory of God, I 
humbly beg you to help me to carry out God's designs. "Lm This was during Holy Mass. Then 
I saw Saint Ignatius at the left side of the altar, with a large book in his hand. And he spoke 
these words to me, "My daughter, I am not indifferent to your cause. This rule can be 
adapted, and it can be adapted to this Congregation." And gesturing with his hand toward 
the big book, he disappeared. I rejoiced greatly at the fact of how much the saints think of us 
and of how closely we are united with them. Oh, the goodness of God! How beautiful is the 
spiritual world, that already here on earth we commune with the saints! All day long, I could 
feel the presence of this dear Patron Saint. 

449 I prepared for this feast with greater zeal than in previous years. On the morning of the feast 
itself, I experienced an inner struggle at the thought that I must leave this Congregation 
which enjoys such special protection from Mary. This struggle lasted through the meditation 
and through the first Mass as well. During the second Mass, I turned to our Holy Mother,

telling Her that it was difficult for me to separate myself from this Congregation... "which is 
under Your special protection, 0 Mary." Then I saw the Blessed Virgin, unspeakably beautiful. 
She came down from the altar to my kneeler, held me close to herself and said to me, / am 
Mother to you all, thanks to the unfathomable mercy of God. Most pleasing to Me is that soul 
which faithfully carries out the will of God. She gave me to understand that I had faithfully 
fulfilled the will of God and had thus found favor in His eyes. Be courageous. Do not fear 
apparent obstacles, but fix your gaze upon the Passion of My Son, and in this way you will be 
victorious. 


Nocturnal Adoration. 


450 I was suffering very much, and it seemed to me I would not be able to make my adoration, 
but I gathered up all my will power and, although I collapsed in my cell, I paid no attention 
to what ailed me, for I had the Passion of Jesus before my eyes. When I entered the chapel, 

I received an inner understanding of the great reward that God is preparing for us, not only 
for our good deeds, but also for our sincere desire to perform them. What a great grace of 
God this is! 

Oh, how sweet it is to toil for God and souls! I want no respite in this battle, but I shall fight 
to the last breath for the glory of my King and Lord. I shall not lay the sword aside until He 
calls me before His throne; I fear no blows, because God is my shield. It is the enemy who 
should fear us, and not we him. Satan defeats only the proud and the cowardly, because the 
humble are strong. Nothing will confuse or frighten a humble soul. I have directed my flight 
at the very center of the sun's heat, and nothing can lower its course. Love will not allow 
itself to be taken prisoner; it is free like a queen. Love attains God. 


Notebook I: 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-52] 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1 151-1200 t 1 201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-1321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 1 


451 Once after Holy Communion, I heard these words: You are Our dwelling place. At that 
moment, I felt in my soul the presence of the Holy Trinity, the Father, the Son and the Holy 
Spirit. I felt that I was the temple of God. I felt I was a child of the Father. I cannot explain 
all this, but the spirit understands it well. 0 infinite Goodness, how low You stoop to Your 
miserable creature! 

452 If only souls would become recollected, God would speak to them at once, for dissipation 
drowns out the word of the Lord. 

453 On one occasion, the Lord said to me, Why are you fearful and why do you tremble 
when you are united to Me? I am displeased when a soul yields to vain terror. Who 
will dare to touch you when you are with Me? Most dear to Me is the soul that 
strongly believes in My goodness and has complete trust in Me. I heap My 
confidence upon it and give it all it asks. 

454 Once, the Lord said to me, My daughter, take the graces that others spurn; take as 
many as you can carry. At that moment, my soul was inundated with the love of God. I 
feel that I am united with the Lord so closely that I cannot find words to express that union; 
in this state I suddenly feel that all the things God has, all the goods and treasures, are 
mine, although I set little store by them, for He alone is enough for me. In Him I see my 
everything; without Him-nothing. 

I look for no happiness beyond my own interior where God dwells. I rejoice that God dwells 
within me; here I abide with Him unendingly; it is here that my greatest intimacy with Him 
exists; here I dwell with Him in safety; here is a place not probed by the human eye. The 
Blessed Virgin encourages me to commune with God in this way. 

455 When some suffering afflicts me, it no longer causes me any bitterness, nor do great

consolations carry me away, I am filled with the peace and equanimity that flow from the 
knowledge of the truth. 

How can living surrounded by unfriendly hearts do me any harm when I enjoy full happiness 
within my soul'? Or how can having kind hearts around me help me when I do not have God 
within me? When God dwells within me, who can harm me? 

+ 

J.M.J. Vilnius, August 12, 1935 


Three-day Retreat. 



456 On the evening of the introductory day of the retreat, as I listened to the points for the 
meditation, I heard these words: During this retreat I will speak to you through the 
mouth of this priest to strengthen you and assure you of the truth of the words 
which I address to you in the depths of your soul. Although this is a retreat for all 
the sisters, I have you especially in mind, as I want to strengthen you and make 
you fearless in the midst of all the adversities which lie ahead. Therefore, listen 
intently to his words and meditate upon them in the depths of your soul. 

457 Oh, how astonished I was, for everything the Father said about union with God and the 
obstacles to this union I had experienced literally in my soul and heard from Jesus, who 
speaks to me in the depths of my soul. Perfection consists in this close union with God. 

458 During the ten-o'clock meditation, Father [Rzyczkowski lml] spoke about divine mercy and 
about God's goodness to us. He said that as we review the history of mankind, we can see 
this great goodness of God at every step. All the attributes of God, such as omnipotence and 
wisdom, serve to reveal to us the greatest of His attributes; namely, His goodness. God's 
goodness is the greatest of God's attributes. Many souls striving for perfection, however, are 
not aware of this great goodness of God. Everything that Father said in the course of the 
meditation about the goodness of God, was exactly what J esus had said to me concerning 
(the Feast of Mercy. I have now come to understand clearly what the Lord has promised me, 
and I have no doubt about anything; God's language is clear and distinct. 

459 Throughout that entire meditation I saw the Lord J esus on the altar, in a white garment, His 
hand holding the notebook in which I write these things. Throughout the entire meditation 
Jesus kept turning the pages of the notebook and remained silent; however, my heart could 
not bear the fire that was enkindled in my soul. Despite the great effort of my will to take 
control of myself and not let others see what was going on in my soul, toward the end of the 
meditation I felt that I was completely beyond my own control. Then Jesus said to me, You 
have not written everything in the notebook about My goodness towards 
humankind; I desire that you omit nothing; I desire that your heart be firmly 
grounded in total peace. 

460 0 Jesus, my heart stops beating when I think of all You are doing for me! I am amazed at 
You, Lord, that Yon would stoop so low to my wretched soul! What inconceivable means You 
take to convince me! 

461 This is the first time in my life that I have made such a retreat. I understand in a special and 
clear way every single word that Father speaks, for I have first experienced it all in my soul. 

I now see that Jesus will not leave in doubt any soul that loves Him sincerely. Jesus wants 
the soul that is in close communion with Him to be filled with peace, despite sufferings and 
adversities. 

462 Now I understand well that what unites our soul most closely to God is self-denial; that is, 
joining our will to the will of God. This is what makes the soul truly free, contributes to 
profound recollection of the spirit, and makes all life's burdens light, and death sweet. 

463 J esus told me that if I should have any doubts regarding the feast or the founding of the 
Congregation,- or regarding anything else about which I have spoken in the depths 
of your soul, I will reply immediately through the mouth of this priest. 


464 During a meditation on humility, an old doubt returned: that a soul as miserable as mine 
could not carry out the task which the Lord was demanding [of me]. Just as I was analyzing 
this doubt, the priest who was conducting the retreat interrupted his train of thought and 
spoke about the very thing I was having doubts about; namely, that God usually chooses the 
weakest and simplest souls as tools for His greatest works; that we can see that this is an

undeniable truth when we look at the men He chose to be His apostles; or again, when we 
look at the history of the Church and see what great works were done by souls that were the 
least capable of accomplishing them; for it is just in this way that God's works are revealed 
for what they are, the works of God. When my doubt had completely disappeared, the priest 
resumed his conference on humility. 

Jesus was standing, as He usually did during each conference, on the altar and said nothing 
to me, but with His kindly gaze pierced my poor soul which no longer had any excuse. 

465 J esus, my Life, how well I feel that You are transforming me into Yourself, in the secrecy of 
my soul where the senses can no longer perceive much. O my Savior, conceal me completely 
in the depths of Your Heart and shield me with Your rays against everything that is not You. I 
beg You, Jesus, let the two rays that have issued from Your most merciful Heart continuously 
nourish my soul. 

466 Time of Confession. 

My confessor [Father Sopocko] asked me if at that moment J esus was there and if I could 
see Him. "Yes, He is here, and I can see Him. " He then told me to ask J esus about certain 
persons. Jesus did not answer me, but looked at him. However, after the confession, when I 
was reciting my penance, Jesus spoke these words to me: Go and console him on my 
behalf. Not understanding the meaning of these words, I immediately repeated to him what 
Jesus had told me to do. 

467 Throughout the whole retreat, I was in uninterrupted communion with J esus and entered into 
an intimate relationship with Him with all the might of my heart. 

468 The day of the renewal of vows. At the beginning of Holy Mass, I saw J esus in the usual way. 
He blessed us and then entered the tabernacle. Then I saw the Mother of God in a white 
garment and blue mantle, with Her head uncovered. She approached me from the altar, 
touched me with Her hands and covered me with Her mantle, saying, Offer these vows for 
Poland. Pray for her. This was on August fifteen. 

469 On the evening of that same day, I felt in my soul a great yearning for God. I do not see Him 
at this moment with my bodily eyes as I have on other occasions, but I sense His presence 
and yet do not grasp Him [with my mind J . This causes me great yearning and torment 
beyond words. I am dying from the desire to possess Him, to be drowned in Him forever. My 
spirit pursues Him with all its might; there is nothing in the world that could comfort me. O 
Love Eternal, now I understand in what close intimacy my heart was with You! For what else 
can satisfy me in heaven or on earth except You, O my God, in Whom my soul is drowned. 



470 One evening, as I looked up from my cell to the sky and saw the beautiful star-strewn 
firmament and the moon, an inconceivable fire of love for my Creator welled up within my 
soul and, unable to bear the yearning for Him that arose within my soul, I fell on my face, 
humbling myself in the dust. I glorified Him for all His works and, when my heart could no 
longer bear what was going on within it, I wept aloud. Then my Guardian Angel touched me 
and spoke to me these words: "The Lord orders me to tell you to rise from the ground." I did 
so immediately, but felt no consolation in my soul. The yearning for God grew even stronger 
in me. 

471 One day, when I was at adoration, and my spirit seemed to be dying for Him, and I could no 
longer hold back my tears, I saw a spirit of great beauty who spoke these words to me: 

"Don't cry-says the Lord." After a moment I asked, "Who are you?" He answered me, "I am 
one of the seven spirits who stand before the throne of God day and night and give Him 
ceaseless praise." Yet this spirit did not soothe my yearning, but roused me to even greater 
longing for God. This spirit is very beautiful, and his beauty comes from close union with 
God. This spirit does not leave me for a single moment, but accompanies me everywhere. 

On the following day during Holy Mass, before the Elevation, this spirit began to sing these 
words: "Holy, Holy, Holy." His voice was like that of a thousand voices; it is impossible to put 
it into words. Suddenly my spirit was united with God, and in that instant I saw the grandeur 
and the inconceivable holiness of God and, at the same time, I realized the nothingness I am 
of myself. 

472 I knew, more distinctly than ever before, the Three Divine Persons, the Father, the Son and

the Holy Spirit. But their being, their equality and their majesty are one. My soul is in 
communion with these Three; but I do not know how to express this in words; yet my soul 
understands it well. Whoever is united to One of the Three Persons is thereby united to the 
whole Blessed Trinity, for this Oneness is indivisible. This vision, or rather, this knowledge 
filled my soul with unimaginable happiness, because God is so great. What I am describing I 
did not see with my eyes, as on previous occasions, but in a purely interior manner, in a 
purely spiritual way, independent of the senses. This continued until the end of Holy Mass. 

This now happens often to me, and not only in the chapel, but also at work and at times 
when I least expect it. 

473 When our confessor [Father Sopocko] was away, I confessed to the Archbishop [Romuald 

J albrzykowski r99i 1. When I revealed my soul to him, I received this reply: "My daughter, arm 
yourself with great patience; if these things come from God, they will be realized sooner or 
later. So be completely at peace. I understand you very well in this matter, my daughter. 

And now, as regards your leaving the Congregation and thinking of another one, do not 
entertain such thoughts, for this would be a serious interior temptation." After this 
confession, I said to the Lord J esus, "Why do Yon command me to do such things and yet do 
not make it possible to accomplish them?" Then I saw the Lord Jesus after Holy Communion 
in the same little chapel where I had gone to confession, in the same way in which He is 
represented in the image. The Lord said to me, Do not be sad. I will give him to 
understand the things I am asking of you. When we were leaving, the Archbishop was 
very busy, but he told us to return and wait a bit. When we entered the chapel again, I heard 
these words in my soul: Tell him what you have seen in this chapel. At that very 
moment the Archbishop came in and asked if we did not have something to tell him. But 
although I had been commanded to tell him, I could not do so because I was in the company 
of one of the sisters. 


One more word from the Holy Confession: "To entreat mercy for the world is a great and 
beautiful idea. Pray much, Sister, pray for mercy upon sinners, but do it in your own 
convent." 

The following day, Friday, September 13, 1935. 

474 In the evening, when I was in my cell, I saw an Angel, the executor of divine wrath. He was 
clothed in a dazzling robe, his face gloriously bright, a cloud beneath his feet. From the 
cloud, bolts of thunder and flashes of lightning were springing into his hands; and from his 
hand they were going forth, and only then were they striking the earth. When I saw this sign 
of divine wrath which was about to strike the earth, and in particular a certain place, which 
for good reasons I cannot name, I began to implore the Angel to hold off for a few moments, 
and the world would do penance. But my plea was a mere nothing in the face of the divine 
anger. Just then I saw the Most Holy Trinity. The greatness of Its majesty pierced me deeply, 
and I did not dare to repeat my entreaties. At that very moment I felt in my soul the power 
of Jesus' grace, which dwells in my soul. When I became conscious of this grace, I was 
instantly snatched up before the Throne of God. Oh, how great is our Lord and God and how 
incomprehensible His holiness! I will make no attempt to describe this greatness, because 
before long we shall all see Him as He is. I found myself pleading with God for the world with 
words heard interiorly. 

As I was praying in this manner, I saw the Angel's helplessness: he could not carry out the 
just punishment which was rightly due for sins. Never before had I prayed with such inner 
power as I did then. 

475 The words with which I entreated God are these: Eternal Father, I offer You the Body 
and Blood, Soul and Divinity of Your dearly beloved Son, Our Lord Jesus Christ for 
our sins and those of the whole world; for the sake of His sorrowful Passion, have 
mercy on us. 

476 The next morning, when I entered chapel, I heard these words interiorly: Every time you 
enter the chapel, immediately recite the prayer which I taught you yesterday. When 
I had said the prayer, in my soul I heard these words: This prayer will serve to appease 
My wrath. You will recite it for nine days, on the beads of the rosary, in the

following manner: First of all, you will say one OUR FATHER and HAI L MARY and the 
I BELI