Source: https://archive.org/download/DiaryOfStFaustinaCopy/Diary%20of%20St%20Faustina%20copy_djvu.txt

---

Divine Mercy 
In my soul 

Preface 

The diary of Sister Maria Faustina H. Kowalska is the record of her life experience - the 
journey of her soul. She was graces by a special communion with God, and the diary 
expresses her conviction that this communion ought to be the center of our lives. Since the 
1940’s the Marians of the Immaculate Conception, St. Stanislaus Kostka Province, have 
shared this conviction and have undertaken the promulgation of God’s mercy throughout the 
world, particularly as it has been proclaimed by Sister Faustina. 

In 1979, convinced of the importance of the diary, the Marians were instrumental in bringing 
it - in its rough typewritten form - out of Poland. We made the necessary corrections to the 
manuscript and published a critical Polish edition that has been promulgated throughout the 

world to Polish speaking people. 

At the same time, we commissioned a couple in Poland, Adam and Danuta Pasicki, to 
translate the diary into English. Once they had completed this first, literal translation, we 
asked Archbishop George Pearce, S.M., to re-translate portions of it in accordance with 
proper English terminology for the various theological concepts and spiritual experiences 
referred to throughout the diary. Archbishop Pearce was supported in this second translation 
by Fahters George Kosicki, C.S.B., Gerald Farrel, M.M., Leo McCauley, S.J, and an Oblate, 

Francis Baga, O.M.I. 

L When this text was completed, it was given to Father Seraphim Michalenko, 
M.I.C, who was Director of the Divine Mercy Department from 1979-1986. 
Together with Sister Sophia Michalenko, C.M.G.T., he carefully reviewed the 
translation, often referring back to the original Polish to ensure exactness of 
expression. Father Joseph Sielski, M.I.C and Father Kazimierz, M.I.C., were 
then asked to review the text, re-reading it for authentic agreement with the 

Finally, in the first part of 1987, the text was returned to the Divine Mercy 
Department, now headed by Father George Kosicki, C.S.B. through his efforts, the tireless 
work of Sister Sophia Michalenko, C.M.G.T, and the assistance of Vincent Flynn, the diary 
was subjected to a complete editing, re-typing, and proofing process for clarity of 
expression and readability according to current English grammar and usage. The index, 
listing the main themes of the diary, was compiled by Father Eugene Ozimek and developed 
by Fr. George Kosicki and Sister Sophia. The design, composition, and mechanicals were then 
completed by Charles Parise and Pat Menatti, and the diary was printed by the Marian Press 
at the Marian helpers center. To all involved with this work, we wish to express our deepest 

gratitude and the assurance of our prayers. 


Since the Polish diary is the official text, we have made every effort to be truly faithful to 


it, and to retain the various shades of meaning implied in the theological and spiritual terms 
used by Sister Faustina - a definite challenge, indeed! In translating the diary, we dealt with 
the same kind of challenge that faces the translators of Sacred Scripture. Some terms allow 
for a variety of expressions even though the meanings are the same, and the final translation 
thus becomes a personal choice of style and expression on the part of the translator. 


For the most part, the texts that have already been published in the popular devotional 
booklets are the same as those used in the diary, though in some instances, there again may 

be slight differences of style and expression. 



’SUS 1 trust, is. \ 


Special Features of this New English Edition 

In the final editing process, inconsistencies of verb tense, capitalization, and punctuation 
were standardized as much as possible without losing Sister Faustina’s unique style and 
powerful simplicity of expression. Our Lord’s words to Sister Faustina were set in Bold Type 
(We, Sue and Marianne, Put Our Lord’s words in Red, Our Lady’s in Blue, and Angels in 
Purple) for emphasis, while Our Lady’s words were set in Italics. The page numbers of Sister 
Faustina’s original notebooks were also set in bold type, and paragraphs thought to be overly 
long or diversified in content were split into shorter paragraph units for readability. 

The footnotes too, have been reexamined, and additional clarifying notes have been added 
where necessary. Notes that were no longer pertinent, in light of changes incorporated into

the English translation, were deleted; and, wherever possible, explanatory notes were 
placed in [square brackets] in the text itself to avoid unnecessary breaks in the reading. 

Our deepest hope is that this diary may truly be a vehicle of grace for all who read it, for in 
reading it we can see that the mercy of God lives forever. 

Above all, we hope that all people will be struck by the truth that mankind will not have 

peace until it turns with trust to God’s mercy. 

May each one of you experience the power of the Blood and Water that poured out from the 
Heart of Jesus as a fount of mercy, and may each of you find confidence and trust in this 

ever present mercy of God! 

Gratefully in the Lord, 

Very Rev. Richard J. Drabik, M.I.C. 

Provincial Superior 

Eden Hill, Stockbridge, Massachusetts 
March 19, 1987. 




^ Jesus / trust ia.Xou 


ORIGINAL PREFACE TO THE POLISH EDITION, 1981 

In presenting this edition of the Diary of Sister Faustina Kowalska I am fully aware that I am 
introducing a document of Catholic mysticism of exceptional worth, not only for the Church 
in Poland, but also for the Universal Church. This publication is the critical edition, and thus 
reliable. It is the work of the Postulator of Sister Faustina, under the direction of the 

authority of the Archdiocese of Cracow. 


The Diary, whose object is devotion to the Divine Mercy, has acquired tremendous interest 
lately for two reasons: Firstly: the Sacred Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, in its 
revision more then two years ago [1978], withdrew the consures and reservations advanced 
earlier by the Holy See in relation to the writings of Sister Faustina. The withdrawal of the 
“Notification” caused the devotion to the Divine Mercy, as presented in the Diary, to grow in 
renewed vitality on all continents, as is evidenced by the numerous testimonies received by 
the Postulator and the Congregation of which Sister Faustina was a member. Secondly: The 
recent encyclical of Pope John Paul II, Dives in Misericordia, happily fixed the attention of 
the Church, and even of the secular world, on this most wonderful attribute of God and 
extraordinary aspect of the economy of salvation, which is the Divine Mercy. 

A comprehensive study in order to indicate the affinity of ideas found in the Diary of Sister 
Faustina and this encyclical (not to mention their probable interdependence) would be most 
welcome. These salient points certainly are numerous, for they draw their inspiration from 
the same source; namely, from the revelation of God and the teaching of Christ. 


Furthermore, they come from the same spiritual environment, from Cracow, the city which, 
as far as I know, possesses the oldest Church dedicated to the honor of the Divine Mercy. It 
is likewise necessary to stress that it was Karol Cardinal Wojtyla, the Archbishop of Cracow 
at that time, who made efforts to begin the Process of Beatification of Sister Faustina 

Kowalska and did inaugurate that process. 


l<tk 


±±Jesus / trust i 


In this light, the Diary of Sister Faustina took on exceptional meaning for the Catholic 
spirituality; and that is why it was fitting to prepare a credible edition, in order to prevent 
distortion of the text by persons who perhaps are acting in good faith, but who are not 
adequately prepared for such work. Thus, publications containing differences and even 
contradictions, such as took place with the spiritual diary of St. Therese of the Child Jesus, 

The Story of a Soul, can be avoided. 


The reader, after just a superficial skimming of the Diary, may be struck by the simplicity of 
the language and even by the spelling and stylistic errors, but he should not forget that the 
author of the Diary had but a limited elementary education. The theology alone which is 
found in the Dairy awakens in the reader a conviction of its uniqueness; and if one considers 
the contrast between Sister Faustina’s education and the loftiness of her theology, the 
contrast alone indicates the special influence of Divine Grace. 

I would like to mention here my meeting with a well known contemporary mystic, Sister 
Speranza, who in Collevalenza, not far from Todi [Italy], founded the sanctuary of “The Most 

Merciful Love,” the site of numerous pilgrimages. 

I asked Sister Speranza whether she had heard of the writings of Sister Faustina and what

she thought of them. She answered me with simplicity: “The writings contain a wonderful 
teaching. But reading them one must remember that God speaks to philosophers in the 
language of philosophers and to simple souls in the language of the simple ones, and only to 
these last does He reveal truths hidden from the wise and prudent of this world.” 

To conclude this preface, permit me to mention yet one more personal recollection from the 
year 1952, when for the first time I took part in a solemn beatification ceremony in St. 
Peter’s Basilica. After the festivity I was asked by some persons who also participated, “Who 

exactly was this blessed one?” 

The question embarrassed me very much, because at the moment I could not recall who 
those blessed were, although I knew full well that the real purpose of a beatification is to 
present to the People of God a model to consider and imitate in their lives. 

Among the candidates for beatification and canonization, Poland has presently two persons 
familiar to the whole world, which knows who they are, what they accomplished in their 
lifetime and what sort of message their lives proclaim. They are Blessed [now Saint] 
Maximilian Kolbe, the martyr of love, and Sister Faustina Kowalska, [now Saint] the Apostle 

of the Divine Mercy. 

Rome, December 20, 1980 
Andrew M. Deskur 
Titular Archbishop of Tene. 



Divine Mercy 
In my soul 

Introduction 


Introduction 

To the Polish Edition, 1981 
1. THE AUTHOR OF THE DAIRY. 

Sister Faustina, Helena Kowalska was born on August 25, 1905, in the village of 
Glogowiec, in Lodz, Poland. At age 14, without completing elementary school, 
she went to work, first in Aleksandrow, Lodz, and then in Lodz itself. By the 
time she was 15 she had made known to her parents her desire to enter the 

convent. 


On August 1, 1925, she entered the Congregation of the Sisters of Our Lady of 
Mercy. She went through her postulancy in Warsaw, and then was sent to the 
novitiate house in Cracow, where during her invertiture she was given the name 
Sister Mary Faustina and was incorporated into the novitiate. After a two year 
novitiate, she made her first profession of vows on April 30, 1928. next, as a 
temporarily professed sister, she worked in various houses of the Congregation: 
in Warsaw, in Vilnius, in Kiekrz near Poznan, in Plock, in Biala near Plock, in 
Warsaw and in Cracow. On May 1, 1933, she took her perpetual vows. 


After only a few weeks of convent life her health began to deteriorate. She had 
contracted consumption and lived through several bouts of this illness. In 
August, 1934, she suffered a violent attack of asthma for the first time. Although 
the doctors did not state it, it already was, in all likelihood, tuberculosis, which 
subsequently progressed to such an extent that in 1936 she spent the last five 
months of her life in that same hospital; and after having been brought back to 
the convent in Cracow, she died there on October 5th. 



Jesus / Crust in . Jou 



2. THE PURPOSE OF WRITING THE DIARY. 

Sister Faustina herself stated that she desired by this writing to 
fulfill the express command of the Lord Jesus and the order of 


both her confessors. Rev. M. Sopocko and Fr. J. Andrasz. She also acknowledged 
that she desired through this diary to inform people of the goodness and grace of 
God. She also noted frequently that she wrote it with the express permission of 
her Superiors, which constituted for her the confirmation of God's will. 

The Diary, in her opinion was not intended to be read by the general public; at 
any rate, never during her lifetime. For this reason she decidedly kept this 
writing a secret from her fellow sisters, of which we have factual evidence in the 
breaks found in several places and in the incomplete sentences in general. 
Besides, she wrote a not in her Diary, aiming her remarks at the would be 
curious, in the following words: "Jesus. No one is permitted to read these 
notebooks and the notes contained therein - Father Andrasz must first check 
them, or Father Sopocko - considering that they are matters of conscience. If it is 
God's will that everything be given to souls for their consolation. It is not 
necessary to give the notebooks themselves to the sisters to read. Superiors 
excepted, until they are edited. Cracow, day of recollection, April 3, 1938. S. 

Faustina." 


From the above words one can gather that the servant of God expected the Diary

to be printed eventually "for the consolation of souls," but desired that it take 

place only after her death. 


Rev. M. Sopocko in his letters explains the reason for the writing of the Diary in 
yet another way. He points out that the number of spiritual experiences of the 
Servant of God was too great to be discussed in the confessional, without having 
third parties notice it. Furthermore, as a seminary professor, he had no time for 
long confessions of this type. He therefore told her to write down everything that 
she considered to be the will of God, and to give it to him periodically for his 

perusal. 


M. 


tlesusl {rust 


3. THE CONTENTS OF THE DIARY. 

The Servant of God writes her experiences and supernatural graces without 
delay. For the most part, she concentrates her attention on matters of the interior 
life and her contact with God. She devotes much room, and this with particular 
care, to the teachings, inspirations, and dispositions of God. At times, she 
mentions actual exterior facts. On some pages she writes her own reflections and 


resolutions stemming from her meditations or from conferences heard, and 
sometimes she even notes directly the essence of the priests' instructions. 


On very many pages we find her poetry, in which she tries to express her 
feelings toward God. These verses have the character of personal expressions of 
love and longing for God. She expresses in them most often her adoration and 
love, as well as her desire of full union with her Creator. The versification itself 
indicates that the author wrote her works spontaneously, more under the 
influence of emotions and affections, than as a result of cold reflection. In a 
criticism of her verses it has been stated that "without knowing he literary 
patterns, she hit upon the path of Polish poetry on her own." 


Writing without a preconceived plan, she at times mentions, along with the 
above details, the environment in which she lives, her work, and the condition of 
her health. Feeling free and easy about form - she was writing for the confessor 
alone - she does not conform her text to a certain style; she is not hampered by a 
lack of periods or other punctuation marks, not even by spelling errors. The text 
itself reflects the great simplicity of the author: emotional, but keeping herself 
under the discipline of the will; uneducated, but extremely prudent and 
distinguished for her sound judgment of things; undergoing trials, but never 
surrendering to psychological depression or to agitation in adversities. 
Submissive to the will of God and full of confidence in the Divine Mercy, as she 
lived united with Him, so she also write of ITim and for ITim. 


Q 

'<3k 


. S . Jes us / t rust t n ‘li/a 


4. CHRONOLOGY IN THE WRITING OF THE DIARY. 

From Rev. M. Sopocko we learn that Sister Faustina burned a certain section of 
the Diary. Informed of this, he made her rewrite from memory, as a penance, the 
destroyed portion and simultaneously to note her current experiences. It was this 
precisely that caused a confusion in the chronology of facts in the greater part of 
the Servant of God's notebooks. Anyway, aware of this fact, she would 
sometimes include the date of the happening; about other matters she writes 
without dates, using the term at one time. As a result, there occurred several 
repetitions of the same fact or experience, for example, see numbers 993 and 996. 

It is evident that the author was not concerned with chronology; that is, the 
sequence of facts, but with the noting of the facts themselves. 


The Servant of God began to write the Diary in 1934. The first poem and notation 
is dated: July 28, 1934. In addition, she wrote retrospectively, returning to 
recollections firs from the year 1925, after which she went to the year 1929 and 
then to 1931. Skipping 1930 and 1932, she begins with facts from the year 1933. 
She then interrupts the flow of the narration and quite unexpectedly returns to 
the year 1928. After this recollection she notes some affairs of the current year, 
which again she interrupts, in order to complete the previous year 1933. On the 
remaining pages in the first notebook, she later wrote, in January 1937, her 

retreat resolutions. 


Basically, from this point. Sister Faustina begins to write everything as it occurs; 
and the recollected elements go back to only a few past days or weeks. Thus, she

first completes the year 1934, then presents the year 1935, continues with the year 
1936 and the year 1937. the years of her illness gave her somewhat more time for 
writing and for this reason are most substantially represented on the pages of the 
Diary. The year of her death (1938) fills up the last part of the Diary. 



Jesus I trust in 'lou 


5. THE TEXT OF THE MANUSCRIPT. 

The entire text of her writings is contained in six notebooks, 20 x 16 cm (size of 
first and second), or 191/2 x 151/2 cm (size of the third and fifth). The fourth 
notebook is the narrowest, its width being scarcely 12 cm. the sixth notebook 
likewise is narrow, being 15 cm wide. All these copybooks are of squared or 
lined sheets quite closely written on both sides. The number of written pages is: 
105 + 160 + 33 + 30 + 71, the total of 477 pages of manuscript. The last notebook is 

not filled. 

The writings in essence show no sign of damage. Only one page was tom out 
(which is noted near the text) by an unknown person. In the individual 
notebooks we find several blank pages, which evidently were intended to be 
used to add something, but from which the servant of God desisted. The 
notebook pages were not numbered. Presently they do possess a pagination, 
made in pencil for practical reasons by Father J. Andrasz, S.J. and Sister Xavier 
Olszamowska of the Congregation of the sisters of Our Lady of Mercy. 

After the completion of the Informative Process in Cracow, all of the notebooks, 
with the exception of the fourth, were bound with a green cloth glued to a stiff 


cardboard. A digit was printed on the cover of each notebook, indicating the 
consecutive number of the pad. The fourth notebook was left in its original form, 
and only the wires were removed to protect it from rust. The wires were replaced 
by ordinary thread. On each notebook cover, with the exception of the fourth, Sr. 
Faustina wrote her religious name and some maxim. It was always a thought 
about the Divine Mercy. These subtitles were taken into account only in the 
present editing of the text. They have been omitted in previous transcripts. 


•iM 


Jlesus 1 trust mi: to u 


6. THE MANNER OF WRITING OF THE DIARY. 

The servant of God very often interlaces the factual accounts with prayers. Into 
her own words she weaves words of the Lord Jesus, or she ends a started 
narrative with the words of the Lord Jesus, a lack of punctuation marks caused, 
as a result, a lack of clarity in the text. It often happens that she begins an account 
of some fact or matter, and ends it with a prayerful turning to God or with an act 
of adoration and admiration for the unfolding Divine activity. 

Besides ordinary prayers, as was already stated, we find in the Diary many 
verses which almost always are a poetic form of prayer. Especially the second 
half of the Diary, where facts and experiences are noted day by day, contains 
many elements which indicate a constant remembrance of the presence of God. 
To the ever-present God she turns with petition and thanksgiving, rejoicing in 
His Love, diligently recording all that she is experiencing. 

In the original Diary manuscript we find a series of words superfluously 
repeated. This leads one to assume that the servant of God was forbidden to 
cross out what she had written. And perhaps it was for this reason that she left 
the repeated words as well as the wrong or unnecessary ones. The state of the 
manuscript allows one also to suppose that she did not reread what she wrote, 
for then she certainly would have inserted, for example, a letter missing in some 

word. 


We find a whole series of underlined words and sentences in the manuscript. 
This was done at the request of Fr. Sopocko, who several times instructed her to 
note in this fashion what the Lord Jesus demanded of her. The number of these 
underlinings bears witness that Sr. Faustina seriously considered everything she 

wrote as a command of the Lord Jesus. 




... Jesus / trust in 


7. HISTORY OF THE TEXT. 

The servant of God always kept the notebooks of the Diary in her own 
possession. Only on occasion did she give them to Fr. Sopocko and then to Fr. 
Andrasz, S.J. to be studied. After her death, the manuscript remained in the 
Congregation, moreoever, it was so carefully guarded and to such an extent that, 
except for a few persons, the Congregation at large new nothing of its existence.

Only when Fr. Andrasz began to write the biography of Sister Faustina was the 
Diary made available to him in confidence, as to a confessor who had full right to 
it. After receiving the Diary from him, the Congregation scrupulously continues 
to guard it. Initially, the Diary of Sister Faustina was rewritten by Sister Xavier 
Olszamowska at the request of Mother general Michaela Moraczewska. 
Unfortunately, this transcription was neither accurate nor scholarly, since the 
copyist thought it proper to add or delate certain little words and make 
grammatical changes; in addition, through human oversight, she omitted some 

of the words. 


To safeguard the Diary, the text was microfilmed in the 1950's. In making copies, 
however, neither the original nor the microfilm were used, but on the typescript 
of Sr. Xavier Olszamowska, which, all in all, was considered authentic, since no 
one compared the copied text with the original. On the contrary, private copies 
and even an Italian translation of this unauthentice text were made. What is 
worse, the above text received in its time the authorization and approbation of 

the Curia of Cracow. 


We know of the following official confirmations of the text of "Sr. Xavier 

Olszamowska"; 

1) of March 3, 1950, the Metroplitan Curia of Cracow No. 1317/50, signed by 
Cardinal A. Sepieha and Fr. Brzycki; 

2) December 6, 1951, the Metropolitan Curia of Cracow No. 10583/51, signed by 
Fr. Wit Brzycki. This text is somewhat different from the former but in non- 
essentials. From it was made the above-mentioned Italian translation and a 
whole series of copies by the Pallotine Fathers. 

3) July 30, 1952, the Metropolitan Curia of Cracow, No. 5625/52, signed by Fr. 
John Pochopien. The text was very similar to the previous one. 


Finally, a copy of the original was made. This last one was included in the Acts 
of the Informative Process in Cracow on October 19, 1967, and signed by Fr. 
Stefan Marszowski. This text was not only transcribed from the original but also 
verified in detail during the Informative Process by Fr. Isidore Borkiewicz, 
O.F.M.. Conv. And sister Beata Piekut of the Congregation of the sisters of Our 
Lady of Mercy in Poland. A French translation was made from this copy. It was 
included in the Acts of the Informative Process, together with the latest transcript 

and photocopies, and sent to Rome. 

The present critical edition is likewise based solely on the manuscript of Sister 
Faustina. The whole critical apparatus, all footnotes and indices, was the work of 
Sister Beata Piekut in cooperation with other sisters who helped to copy the texts. 

As a historian, the undersigned Promoter of Faith of the Informative Process 
served in this by his advice and suggestions. He was in continues contact wit the 
sister preparing the present edition. He watched over the authenticity of the texts 
and their accuracy, both factual and historical. The text thus prepared and 
monographed was sent to Rome to Fr. Anthony Mruk, S.J.. General Postulator of 
the Cause, so that after his authoritative verification and under his direction it 


would be ready to appear in print. 



8. THE MEANING AND VALUE OF THE DIARY. 

The Diary of Sister Faustina is not some kind of collection of "marvels" or a book 
containing accounts of extraordinary visions. Such a judgment could be made 
after a cursory and inattentive reading of it. Actually, it is a valuable and 
instructive literary work. First of all, it reveals the Servant of God's interior life. 
From the pages of the Diary she appears to us as a person demanding of herself 
and resolute in her striving for perfection. We see how intensely Sister Faustian 
works and takes advantage of every occasion to be enriched spiritually. Through 
the Diary we get to know her difficulties and dark nights of soul, as well as her 
mystical flights, illuminations and interior consolations. What merits special 
emphasis is her inner strength, flowing most certainly from her reliance on God 
and her unquestionable heroic trust in the Divine Mercy. 


The Diary presents to us in an eloquent and convincing manner the infinity of 
the Divine Mercy. It not only teaches one about the Most Merciful Savior, but 


also encourages one to worship Him. It likewise shows us in a practical way 
various forms of worship, and at the same time illustrates facts of Divine 
interventions and His answers to the prayers of those who earnestly petition

Him. The Diary has this value, also, that it teaches a childlike and very simple 
relationship to God, that it suggests the possibility of union with a God present 
to us at each moment. It is true that it indicates that living in the presence of God 
is a grace, but a grace obtainable trough prayer and a humble trust in God. 


The outstanding value of the Diary, however, is in the instruction and 
encouragement it give to live an intensive interior life. Through Sister Faustina's 
example it teaches us the need of diligent and resolute work on inner discipline. 
It teaches in a practical way the difficult art of love of one's neighbor. It contains 
many correct teachings and incentives toward unyielding interior discipline and, 
what is more important, toward an unshaken trust in God's assistance, especially 

in this work. 



Resits I trust in ‘You 


9. SIGNIFICANT TEXTUAL INACCURACIES IN THE FORMER 

TRANSCRIPTS. 

As compared to the original, the former transcripts have omitted entire pages, 
left out whole sentences, and changed a great many of the words, substituting 
them with others. The number of inaccuracies cited fill several single-spaced 
typewritten pages, it is not surprising, therefore, that the former texts met with 
censure and mistrust. And thus, for example, on page 7 of the typewritten copy, 
8 mistakes were found; on page 25, 7 mistakes, on page 177, 8, etc. 

It suffices to cite a few examples to show what some of the mistakes of these first 
transcriptions were. Apart from the fact that the paginations of the manuscript 
are inaccurate, it must be stated that many things have been omitted as, for 
example, on page 85 of the manuscript. The original text is the following: "you 
will strive for deep peace in abiding with me. I shall remove all doubts in this 
regard. I know that now you are peaceful. . ." in the transcript, on the other hand 
we find: "You will strive for deep peace in abiding with me. I know that now you 
are peaceful..." a little further on the same page: "when he ends the conference, 
and present to him the fears you have regarding Me, and I shall answer you. . ." 
but in the transcript it reads: "when he ends the conference, and I shall answer 

you..." 


On page 153 of the manuscript is the sentence: "The meditation was no 
mortification for me, for thinking about God is a delight and not a mortification; 
but there was a mortification of the will in that I was not doing (simply) what I 
like but what I was told to do, and it is in this that interior mortification 
consists." In the transcript it received this form: "the meditation was not a 
mortification for me, for thinking about God is a delight and not an interior 

mortification." 

On page 202 of the original are these words of the Lord Jesus: "Why are you 
afraid to do My will? Will I not help you as I have done thus far? Repeat 
everyone of my demands to those who represent Me on earth, but do 
only what they tell you to do." At that, a certain strength entered my soul. 
The next morning..." They were transcribed thus" "Why are you afraid to do 

My will? The next morning. . ." 

The amount of these omissions is enormous. The worst of it is that they were 
retained in the Italian translation. But a much greater wrong is a whole series of 
unclear stylistics which were left uncorrected. Sister Faustina would make the 
transition from using her own words to quoting the words of the Lord Jesus all 
in the same sentence. And so, for example, on page 161 of her manuscript we 
find such a sentence: "God promised a great grace especially to you and 
everyone [-here she proceeds to quote the Lord Jesus-] who will make known 
this great mercy of Mine." Such a sentence without clarification is not only 
unintelligible, but point blank smacks of heresy. The sentence on page 26 of 
notebook V, number 1379 is similar to it. 

From among many such ambiguities, which without a footnote are completely 
incomprehensible, let us cite one more example. On page 161 of the manuscript, 
Sr. Faustina says: "When the priest was saying these words, that an obedient soul 
is filled with the strength of God, [-the servant of God interjects without any sign 
the words of the Lord Jesus-] yes, when you are obedient I take away your 
weakness and replace it with My strength. 

The inaccurate transcription also caused, in some places, a confusion in essential

matters of the text. And so, on page 202 of the manuscript we have the sentence: 
"it is my desire to share this happiness with all people. I cannot lock it away in 
my own heart alone, for His flames burn me and cause my bosom and my 


entrails to burst asunder." 

In the former transcriptions, however, the sentence looked like this: "I desire to 
share this happiness with all people, I cannot lock this happiness in my own 
heart, for my flames burn me and cause my bosom and entrails to burst asunder" 

(The emphasis of Fr. J.M.). 

Morever, the original text itself is sometimes confusing as, for example, page 69 

of notebook V, number 1464. 

_____ 

^ Jesus I trust in ‘Jvu 

10. THE PRINCIPLES OF THE PRESENT PRINTED TEXT. 

The Diary in the present edition was not only more completely checked against 
the original, but was likewise amply provided with scholarly research. Besides 
the present introduction, were added a calendar of the life of the author, an index 
of persons, things, and names of places. Also, pertinent footnotes were added to 
clarify the meaning of the text, as well as for a better understanding of certain 
facts related by the Servant of God, and of certain phrases and expressions of the 
author. In these same footnotes the problems needing deeper analysis were 
extensively treated as, for instance, the matter of a congregation dedicated to the 
worship of the Divine Mercy or the matter of painting the image of the Merciful 

Lord Jesus. 

The Diary text is enriched by a newly discovered, carefully handwritten, small, 
but precious and rich in content, work of Sister Faustina entitled, "My 
Preparation for Holy Communion." It was written in a small notebook, 71/2 by 
11 cm, where on 12 sides of small squared graph paper were recorded Sister 
Faustina's innermost thoughts associated with a particular reception of Holy 
Communion. If one can rely on the dates she herself noted, she began writing her 
reflections about Holy Communion in Cracow on January 10, 1938. This text was 

included in the Diary indices. 

In a few places where the stylistic text was unclear, the necessary words or letters 
were added in brackets. The Servant of God quite often used ungrammatical 
abbreviations. Throughout the Diary the punctuation marks were made uniform 
for, in general, it possessed none. This was all the more necessary since the 
ambiguities of some texts could arouse doubt. The newest spelling of words was 
applied, and misspelled words were corrected without any signs of change being 
given. However, in the Polish version, certain known specialties of style of the 


author were retained as, for example, her using "tym . . . im" (the more . . . the 
more) with the comparative degree of adjectives or adverbs, which in the Polish 
of today are used in the inverse order; that is, "im . . .tym." 

The present text was given a fourfold numbering system on each page. In the 
upper center of each page, in Roman Numerals, are placed the numbers of the 
original notebooks of Sr. Faustina's manuscripts. 

The Arabic Numeral in parentheses at the beginning or within the text 
designates the corresponding page in the original notebooks written by Sr. 

Faustian. 

Numbers were placed in sequence at the sides of the Diary text to make it easier 
for the reader to find the particular themes contained in the indices of persons, 

places and things. 

The raised numbers in Italics placed beside certain words in the text indicate the 
sequential numbers of individual footnotes explaining the contents of the Diary. 

Fr. Jerzy Mroqczynski 
Vice-Promoter of Faith 
In the Informative Process 
Radziwillow, May 7, 1973 



Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 1 


1 0 Eternal Love, You command Your Sacred I mage m to be painted 

And reveal to us the inconceivable fount of mercy, 

You bless whoever approaches Your rays, 

And a soul all black will turn into snow. 

0 sweet J esus, it is here m You established the throne of Your mercy 
To bring joy and hope to sinful man. 

From Your open Heart, as from a pure fount, 

Flows comfort to a repentant heart and soul. 

May praise and glory for this Image 
Never cease to stream from man's soul. 

May praise of God's mercy pour from every heart, 

Now, and at every hour, and forever and ever. 

0 My God 

2 When I look into the future, I am frightened, 

But why plunge into the future? 

Only the present moment is precious to me,

As the future may never enter my soul at all. 

It is no longer in my power, 

To change, correct or add to the past; 

For neither sages nor prophets could do that. 

And so, what the past has embraced I must entrust to God. 

0 present moment, you belong to me, whole and entire. 

1 desire to use you as best I can. 

And although I am weak and small, 

You grant me the grace of your omnipotence. 

And so, trusting in Your mercy, 

I walk through life like a little child, 

Offering You each day this heart 
Burning with love for Your greater glory. 


+ 

J.M.J. 

[Jesus, Mary, and Joseph] 
God and souls 

King of Mercy, guide my soul. 


3 


Sister M. Faustina 
of the Blessed Sacrament 

Vilnius, J uly 28, 1934 

0 my J esus, because of my trust in You, 

1 weave thousands of garlands, and I know That they will all blossom. 

And I know that they will all blossom 

When God's sun will shine on them. 

+ 0 great and Divine Sacrament 
That veils my God! 

Jesus, be with me each moment, 

And no fear will enter my heart. 


Vilnius, J uly 28, 1934 
+ First notebook 


God and Souls. 

Be adored, 0 Most Holy Trinity, now and for all time. Be adored in all Your works and all 
Your creatures. May the greatness of Your mercy be admired and glorified, 0 God. 


I am to write lh down the encounters of my soul with You, 0 God, at the moments of Your 
special visitations. I am to write about You, 0 Incomprehensible in mercy towards my poor 
soul. Your holy will is the life of my soul. I have received this order through him who is for 
me Your representative here on earth, who interprets Your holy Will to me. Jesus, You see 
how difficult it is for me to write, how unable I am to put down clearly what I experience in 
my soul. 0 God, can a pen write down that for which many a time there are no words? But 
You give the order to write, 0 God; that is enough for me. 


Warsaw, August 1, 1925 

Entrance into the Convent 

From the age of seven, I experienced the definite call of God, the grace of a vocation to the 
religious life. It was in the seventh year of my life that, for the first time, I heard God's 
voice in my soul; that is, an invitation to a more perfect life. But I was not always obedient 
to the call of grace. I came across no one who would have explained these things to me. 

The eighteenth year of my life. An earnest appeal to my parents for permission to enter the 
convent. My parents' flat refusal. After this refusal, I turned myself over to the vain things 
of life, paying no attention to the call of grace, although my soul found no satisfaction in 
any of these things. The incessant call of grace caused me much anguish; I tried, however, 
to stifle it with amusements. Interiorly, I shunned God, turning with all my heart to 
creatures. However, God's grace won out in my soul. 


9 Once I was at a dance [probably in Lodz] with one of my sisters. While everybody was 
having a good time, my soul was experiencing deep torments. As I began to dance. I 
suddenly saw Jesus at my side, Jesus racked with pain, stripped of His clothing, all covered 
with wounds, who spoke these words to me: How long shall I put up with you and how 
long will you keep putting Me off? At that moment the charming music stopped, [and] 
the company I was with vanished from my sight; there remained J esus and I. I took a seat 
by my dear sister, pretending to have a headache in order to cover up what took place in 
my soul. After a while I slipped out unnoticed, leaving my sister and all my companions 
behind and made my way to the Cathedral of Saint Stanislaus Kostka. 

It was almost twilight; there were only a few people in the cathedral. Paying no attention to 
what was happening around me, I fell prostrate before the Blessed Sacrament and begged 
the Lord to be good enough to give me to understand what I should do next. 

10 Then I heard these words: Go at once to Warsaw; you will enter a convent there. I 

rose from prayer, came home, and took care of things that needed to be settled. As best I 
could, I confided to my sister what took place within my soul. I told her to say good-by to 
our parents, and thus, in my one dress, with no other belongings, I arrived in Warsaw. 

11 When I got off the train and saw that all were going their separate ways, I was overcome 
with fear. What am I to do? To whom should I turn, as I know no one? So I said to the 
Mother of God, "Mary, lead me, guide me." Immediately I heard these words within me

telling me to leave the town and to go to a certain nearby village where I would find a safe 
lodging for the night. I did so and found in fact that everything was just as the Mother of 
God told me. 

12 Very early the next day, I rode back into the city and entered the first church I saw [St. 
James Church at Grojecka Street in Ochota, a suburb of Warsaw]. There I began to pray to 
know further the will of God. Holy Masses were being celebrated one after another. During 
one of them I heard the words: Go to that priest [Father J ames Dabrowski, pastor of St. 
James' Parish] and tell him everything; he will tell you what to do next. After the 
Mass I went to the sacristy. I told the priest all that had taken place in my soul, and I asked 
him to advise me where to take the veil, in which religious order. 

13 The priest was surprised at first, but told me to have strong confidence that God would 
provide for my future. "For the time being," he said, "I shall send you to a pious lady 
[Aldona LipszycowaMj] with whom you will stay until you enter a convent." When I called 
on this lady, she received me very kindly. During the time I stayed with her, I was looking 
for a convent, but at whatever convent door I knocked, I was turned away. Sorrow gripped 
my heart, and I said to the Lord J esus, "Help me; don't leave me alone." At last I knocked 
on our door. [51 

14 When Mother Superior, the present Mother General Michael ull came out to meet me, she 
told me, after a short conversation, to go to the Lord of the house and ask whether He 
would accept me. I understood at once that I was to ask this of the Lord Jesus. With great 
joy, I went to the chapel and asked J esus: "Lord of this house, do You accept me? This is 
how one of these sisters told me to put the question to You." 

Immediately I heard this voice: I do accept; you are in My Heart. When I returned from 
the chapel, Mother Superior asked first of all, "Well, has the Lord accepted you?" I 
answered, "Yes." "If the Lord has accepted, [she said] then I also will accept." 


15 This is how I was accepted. However, for many reasons I still had to remain in the world for 
more than a year with that pious woman [Aldona Lipszycowa], but I did not go back to my 
own home. 

At that time I had to struggle with many difficulties, but God was lavish with His graces. An 
ever greater longing for God began to take hold of me. The lady, pious as she was, did not 
understand the happiness of religious life and, in her kindheartedness began to make other 
plans for my future life. And yet, I sensed that I had a heart so big that nothing would be 
capable of filling it. And so I turned with all the longing of my soul to God. 

16 It was during the octave of Corpus Christi [June 25, 1925]. God filled my soul with the 
interior light of a deeper knowledge of Him as Supreme Goodness and Supreme Beauty. I 
came to know how very much God loves me. Eternal is His love for me. It was at vespers. 

In simple words, which flowed from the heart, I made to God a vow of perpetual chastity. 
From that moment I felt a greater intimacy with God, my Spouse. From that moment I set 
up a little cell in my heart where I always kept company with Jesus. 

17 At last the time came when the door of the convent was opened for me - it was the first of 
August [ 1925], in the evening, the vigil [of a feast] of Our Lady of the Angels. I felt 
immensely happy; it seemed to em that I had stepped into the life of Paradise. A single 
prayer was bursting forth from my heart, one of thanksgiving. 

18 However, after three weeks I became aware that there is so very little time here for prayer, 
and of many other things which spoke to my soul in favor of entering a religious community 
of a stricter observance. This thought took a firm hold of my soul, but the will of God was 
not in it. Still, the thought, or rather the temptation, was growing stronger and stronger to 
the point where I decided one day to announce my departure to Mother Superior and 
definitely to leave [the convent]. But God arranged the circumstances in such a way that I 
could not get to the Mother Superior [Michael]. I stepped into the little chapel ui before 
going to bed, and I asked Jesus for light in this matter. But I received nothing in my soul 
except a strange unrest which I did not understand. But, in spite of everything, I made up 
my mind to approach Mother Superior the next morning right afte rMass and tell her of my

decision. 

19 I came to my cell. The sisters were already in bed - the lights were out. I entered the cell 
full of anguish and discontent; I did not know what to do with myself. I threw myself 
headlong on the ground and began to pray fervently that I might come to know the will of 
God. There is silence everywhere as in the tabernacle. All the sisters are resting like white 
hosts enclosed in J esus' chalice. It is only from my cell that God can hear the moaning of a 
soul. I did not know that one was not allowed to pray in the cell after nine without 
permission, lsi 

After a while a brightness filled my cell, and on the curtain I saw the very sorrowful Face of 
Jesus. There were open wounds on His Face, and large tears were falling on my bedspread. 
Not knowing what all this meant, I asked J esus, "J esus who has hurt You so?" And J esus 
said to me, It is you who will cause Me this pain if you leave this convent. It is to 
this place that I called you and nowhere else; and I have prepared many graces 
for you. I begged pardon of Jesus and immediately changed my decision. 

The next day was confession day. I related all that had taken place in my soul, and the 
confessor answered that, from this, God's will is clear that I am to remain in this 


congregation and that I'm not even to think of another religious order. From that moment 
on, I have always felt happy and content. 

20 Shortly after this, I fell ill [general exhaustion]. The dear Mother Superior sent me with two 
other sisters for a rest to Skolimow, not far from Warsaw. It was at that time that I asked 
the Lord who else I should pray for. Jesus said that on the following night He would let me 
know for whom I should pray. 

[The Next night] I saw my Guardian Angel, who ordered me to follow him. In a moment I 
was in a misty place full of fire in which there was a great crowd of suffering souls. They 
were praying fervently, but to no avail, for themselves; only we can come to their aid. The 
flames which were burning them did not touch me at all. My Guardian Angel did not leave 
me for an instant. I asked these souls what their greatest suffering was. They answered me 
in one voice that their greatest torment was longing for God. I saw Our Lady visiting the 
souls in Purgatory. The souls call her "The Star of the Sea." She brings them refreshment. I 
wanted to talk with them some more, but my Guardian Angel beckoned me to leave. We 
went out of that prison of suffering. [I heard and interior voice] which said, My mercy does 
not want this, but justice demands it. Since that time, I am in closer communion with 
the suffering souls. 

21 End of postulancy [April 29, 1926] - My superiors [probably Mother Leonard and Mother 
Jane [9i] sent me to the novitiate in Cracow. An inconceivable joy reigned in my soul. When 
we arrived at the novitiate, Sister [Henrvnoil was dying. A few days later she came to me 
[in spirit, after her death] and bid me to go to the Mother Directress of Novices [Sister 
Margaret r in 1 and tell her to ask her confessor, Father Rospond, lih to offer one Mass for 
her and three ejaculatory prayers. At first I agreed, but the next day I decided I would not 
go to Mother Directress, because I was not sure whether this had happened in a dream or in 
reality. And so I did not go. 

The following night the same thing was repreated more clearly; I had no more doubt. Still, 
in the morning I decided not to tell the Directress about it unless I saw her [Sister Henry] 
during the day. At once I ran into her in the corridor. She reproached me for not having 
gone immediately, and a great uneasiness filled my soul. So I went immediately to Mother 
Directress and told her everything that had happened to me. Mother responded that she 
would take care of the matter. At once peace reigned in my soul, and on the third day this 
sister came to me and said, "May God repay you." 

22 The day I took the [religious] habit, mi God let me understand how much I was to suffer. I 
clearly saw to what I was committing myself. I experienced a moment of that suffering. But 
then God filled my soul again with great consolations. 


23 Toward the end of the first year of my novitiate, darkness began to cast its shadow over my 
soul. I felt no consolation in prayer; I had to make a great effort to meditate; fear began to 
sweep over me. Going deeper into myself, I could find nothing but great misery. I could also

clearly see the great holiness of God. I did not dare to raise my eyes to Him, but reduced 
myself to dust under His feet and begged for mercy. My soul was in this state for almost six 
months. Our beloved Mother Directress [Mary Joseph ri4i 1 encouraged me in these difficult 
moments. But this suffering became greater and greater. 

The second year of the novitiate was approaching. Whenever I recalled that I was to make 
my vows, my soul shuddered. I did not understand what I was reading; I could not 
meditate; it seemed to me that my prayer was displeasing to God. It seemed to me that by 
approaching the Holy Sacraments I was offending God even more. But despite this, my 
confessor [Father Theodore nsi l did not let me omit one single Holy Communion. God was 
working very strangely in my soul. I did not understand anything at all of what my 
confessor was telling me. The simple truths of the faith became incomprehensible to me. My 
soul was in anguish, unable to find comfort anywhere. 

24 One day, just as I had awakened, when I was putting myself in the presence of God, I was 
suddenly overwhelmed by despair. Complete darkness in the soul. I fought as best I could 
till noon. In the afternoon, truly deadly fears began to seize me; my physical strength 
began to leave me. I went quickly to my cell, fell on my knees before the Crucifix and began 
to cry out for mercy. But Jesus did not hear my cries. I felt my physical strength leave me 
completely. I fell to the ground, despair flooding my whole soul. I suffered terrible tortures 
in no way different from the torments of hell. I was in this state for three quarters of an 
hour. I wanted to go and see the Directress, but was too weak. I wanted to shout but I had 
no voice. Fortunately, one of the sisters [another novice, Sister Placida Putyra] came into 
my cell. Finding me in such a strange condition, she immediately told the Directress about 
it. Mother came at once. As soon as she entered the cell she said, "In the name of holy 
obedience U6i get up from the ground." I mmediately some force raised me up from the 
ground and I stood up, close to the dear Mother Directress. With kindly words she began to 
explain to me that this was a trial sent to me by God, saying, "Have great confidence; God 
is always our Father, even when He sends us trials." 

I returned to my duties as if I had come out from the tomb, my senses saturated with what 
my soul had experienced. During the evening service, my soul began to agonize again in a 
terrible darkness. I felt that I was in the power of the J ust God, and that I was the object of 
His indignation. During these terrible moments I said to God, "Jesus, who in the Gospel 
compare Yourself to a most tender mother," I trust in Your words because You are Truth 
and Life. In spite of everything, Jesus, I trust in You in the face of every interior sentiment 
which sets itself against hope. Do what You want with me; I will never leave You, because 
You are the source of my life." Only one who has lived through similar moments can 
understand how terrible is this torment of the soul. 


25 During the night, the Mother of God visited me, holding the I nfant J esus in Her arms. My 
soul was filled with joy, and I said, "Mary, my Mother, do You know how terribly I suffer?" 
And the Mother of God answered me, / know how much you suffer, but do not be afraid. I 
share with you your suffering, and I shall always do so. She smiled warmly and 
disappeared. At once, strength and a great courage sprang up anew in my soul; but that 
lasted only one day. It seemed as though hell had conspired against me. A terrible hatred 
began to break out in my soul, a hatred for all that is holy and divine. It seemed to me that 
these spiritual torments would be my lot for the rest of my life. I turned to the Blessed 
Sacrament and said to J esus, "J esus, my Spouse, do You not see that my soul is dying 
because of its longing for You? How can You hide Yourself from a heart that loves You so 
sincerely? Forgive me, Jesus; may Your holy will be done in me. I will suffer silently like a 
dove, without complaining. I will not allow my heart even one single cry of sorrowful 
complaint." 

26 26 End of the novitiate. The suffering does not diminish. Physical weakness dispenses me 
from all [community] spiritual exercises; that is to say, they are replaced by brief 
ejaculatory prayers. Good Friday [April 16, 1928] -Jesus catches up my heart into the very

flame of His love. This was during the evening adoration. All of a sudden, the Divine 
Presence invaded me, and I forgot everything else. Jesus gave me to understand how much 
He had suffered for me. This lasted a very short time. An intense yearning-a longing to love 
God. 

27 First vows [First profession of temporary vows, April 30, 1928]. An ardent desire to empty 
myself for God by an active love, but a love that would be imperceptible, even to the sisters 
closest to me. 

However, even after the vows, darkness continued to reign in my soul for almost a half 
year. Once, when I was praying, Jesus pervaded all my soul, darkness melted away, and I 
heard these words within me: You are My joy; you are My heart's delight. From that 
moment I felt the Most Holy Trinity in my heart; that is to say, within myself. I felt that I 
was inundated with Divine light. Since then, my soul has been in intimate communion with 
God, like a child with its beloved Father. 

28 Once Jesus told me, Go to Mother Superior [probably Mother Raphael 18] and ask 
her to let you wear a hair shirt for seven days, and once each night you are to get 
up and come to the chapel. I said yes, but I found a certain difficulty in actually going to 
the Superior. In the evening Jesus asked me, How long will you put it off? I made up my 
mind to tell Mother Superior the very next time I would see her. 

The next day before noon I saw Mother Superior