 of vows. From the moment I woke up in the morning, my spirit was totally 
submerged in God, in that ocean of love. I felt that I had been completely immersed in Him. 
During Holy Mass, my love for Him reached a peak of intensity. After the renewal of vows 
and Holy Communion, I suddenly saw the Lord Jesus, who said to me with great kindness, 

My daughter, look at My merciful Heart. As I fixed my gaze on the Most Sacred Heart, 
the same rays of light, as are represented in the image as blood and water, came forth from 
it, and I understood how great is the Lord's mercy. And again Jesus said to me with 
kindness, My daughter, speak to priests about this inconceivable mercy of Mine. The 
flames of mercy are burning Me-clamoring to be spent; I want to keep pouring 
them out upon souls; souls just don't want to believe in My goodness. Suddenly J esus 
disappeared. But throughout that whole day my spirit remained immersed in God's tangible 
presence, despite the buzz and chatter that usually follow a retreat. It did not disturb me in 
the least. My spirit was in God, although externally I took part in the conversations and even 
went to visit Perdv.[59i 


178 Today we are beginning the third probation. All three of us met at Mother Margaret's, as the 
other sisters were having their probation in the novitiate. Mother Margaret began with a 
prayer, explained to us what the third probation consists of, and then spoke on how great is 
the grace of the perpetual vows. Suddenly I began to cry out loud. In an instant all God's 
graces appeared before the eyes of my soul, and I saw myself so wretched and ungrateful 
toward God. The sisters began to rebuke me, saying, "Why did she break out crying?" But 
Mother Margaret came to my defense, saying that she was not surprised. 

At the end of the hour, I went before the Blessed Sacrament and, like the greatest and most 
miserable of wretches, I begged for His mercy that He might heal and purify my poor soul. 
Then I heard these words, My daughter, all your miseries have been consumed in the

flame of My love, like a little twig thrown into a roaring fire. By humbling yourself 
in this way, you draw upon yourself and upon other souls an entire sea of My 
mercy. I answered, "Jesus, mold my poor heart according to Your divine delight." 

179 Throughout the third probation it was my duty to help the sister in the vestiary. jjjoi This duty 
gave me many occasions to practice virtues. Sometimes I had to take linen to certain sisters 
three times and still one could not satisfy them. But I also came to recognize the great 
virtues of some sisters who always asked for the poorest things from the vestiary. I admired 
their spirit of humility and mortification. 

180 +During Advent, a great yearning for God arose in my soul. My spirit rushed toward God with 
all its might. During that time, the Lord gave me much light to know His attributes. 

The first attribute which the Lord gave me to know is His holiness. His holiness is so great 
that all the Powers and Virtues tremble before Him. The pure spirits veil their faces and lose 
themselves in unending adoration, and with one single word they express the highest form of 
adoration; that is-Holy... The holiness of God is poured out upon the Church of God and upon 
every living soul in it, but not in the same degree. There are souls who are completely 
penetrated by God, and there are those who are barely alive. 

The second kind of knowledge which the Lord granted me concerns His justice. His justice is 
so great and penetrating that it reaches deep into the heart of things, and all things stand 
before Him in naked truth, and nothing can withstand Him. 

The third attribute is love and mercy. And I understood that the greatest attribute is love and 
mercy. It unites the creature with the Creator. This immense love and abyss of mercy are 
made known in the I ncarnation of the Word and in the Redemption [of humanity], and it is 
here that I saw this as the greatest of all God's attributes. 

181 Today I was cleaning the room of one of the sisters. Although I was trying to clean it with 
utmost care, she kept following me all the time and saying, "You've left a speck of dust here 
and a spot on the floor there." At each of her remarks I did each place over a dozen times 
just to satisfy her. It is not work that makes me tired, but all this talking and excessive 
demands. My whole day's martyrdom was not enough for her, so she went to the Directress 
and complained, "Mother, who is this careless sister who doesn't know how to work quickly?" 
The next day, I went again to do the same job, without trying to explain myself. When she 
started driving me, I thought, "Jesus, one can be a silent martyr; it is not the work that 
wears you out, but this kind of martyrdom." 


182 I learned that certain people have a special gift for vexing others. They try you as best they 
can. The poor soul that falls into their hands can do nothing right; her best efforts are 
maliciously criticized. 

+Christmas Eve. 

Today I was closely united with the Mother of God. I relived her interior sentiments. In the 
evening, before the ceremony of the breaking of the wafer, I went into the chapel to break 
the wafer, in spirit, with my loved ones, and I asked the Mother of God for graces for them. 
My spirit was totally steeped in God. During the Midnight Mass ["Pasterka" or Shepherds' 
Mass], I saw the Child J esus in the Host, and my spirit was immersed in Him. Although He 
was a tiny Child, His majesty penetrated my soul. I was permeated to the depths of my being 
by this mystery, this great abasement on the part of God, this inconceivable emptying of 
Himself. These sentiments remained vividly alive in my soul all through the festive season. 

Oh, we shall never comprehend this great self-abasement on the part of God; the more I 
think of it, [unfinished thought]. 

183 One morning after Holy Communion, I heard this voice, I desire that you accompany Me 
when I go to the sick. I answered that I was quite willing, but after a moment of reflection 
I started wondering how I was going to do so; the sisters of the second choirr6ii do not 
accompany the Blessed Sacrament. It is always the sister-directresses who go. I thought to 
myself: Jesus will find a way. Shortly afterwards, Mother Raphael sent for me and said, 
"Sister, you will accompany the Lord J esus when the priest goes to visit the sick." And all

through the time of my probation I carried the light, accompanying the Lord and, as a knight 
of J esus, 1 always tried to gird myself with an iron belt,[6n for it would not be proper to 
accompany the King in everyday dress. And I offered this mortification for the sick. 

184 +Holy Hour. During this hour, I tried to meditate on the Lord's Passion. But my soul was filled 
with joy, and suddenly I saw the Child J esus. But His majesty penetrated me to such an 
extent that I said, "Jesus, You are so little, and yet I know that You are my Creator and 
Lord." And Jesus answered me, I am, and I keep company with you as a child to teach 
you humility and simplicity. 

I gathered all my sufferings and difficulties into a bouquet for Jesus for the day of our 
perpetual betrothal. Nothing was difficult for me, when I remembered it was for my 
Betrothed as proof of my love for Him. 

185 +My silence for J esus. I strove after great silence for J esus. Amidst the greatest din, J esus 
always found silence in my heart, although it sometimes cost me a lot. But what can be too 
great for Jesus, for Him whom 1 love with all the strength of my heart? 

186 +Today J esus said to me, I desire that you know more profoundly the love that burns 
in My Heart for souls, and you will understand this when you meditate upon My 
Passion. Call upon My mercy on behalf of sinners; I desire their salvation. When you 
say this prayer, with a contrite heart and with faith on behalf of some sinner, I will 
give him the grace of conversion. This is the prayer: 

187 "O Blood and Water, which gushed forth from the Heart of Jesus as a fount of Mercy 
for us, I trust in You." 


188 During the last days of the carnival, when I was making a Holy Hour, I saw how the Lord 
Jesus suffered as He was being scourged. Oh, such an inconceivable agony! How terribly 
Jesus suffered during the scourging! O poor sinners, on the day of judgment how will you 
face the J esus whom you are now torturing so cruelly? His blood flowed to the ground, and in 
some places His flesh started to fall off. I saw a few bare bones on His back. The meek Jesus 
moaned softly and sighed. 

189 On one occasion, Jesus gave me to know how pleasing to Him is the soul that faithfully keeps 
the rule. A soul will receive a greater reward for observing the rule than for penances and 
great mortifications. The latter will be rewarded also if they are undertaken over and above 
the rule, but they will not surpass the rule. 

190 Once during an adoration, the Lord demanded that I give myself up to Him as an offering, by 
bearing a certain suffering in atonement, not only for the sins of the world in general, but 
specifically for transgressions committed in this house. Immediately I said, "Very good; I am 
ready." But J esus gave me to see what I was going to suffer, and in one moment the whole 
passion unfolded itself before my eyes. Firstly, my intentions will not be recognized; there 
will be all kinds of suspicion and distrust as well as various kinds of humiliations and 
adversities. I will not mention everything here. All these things stood before my soul's eye 
like a dark storm from which lightning was ready to strike at any moment, waiting only for 
my consent. For a moment, my nature was frightened. Then suddenly the dinner bell rang. I 
left the chapel, trembling and undecided. But the sacrifice was ever present before me, for I 
had neither decided to accept it, nor had I refused the Lord. I wanted to place myself 
completely in His will. If the Lord J esus himself were to impose it on me, I was ready. But 
Jesus gave me to know that I myself was to give my free consent and accept it with full 
consciousness, or else it would be meaningless. Its whole power was contained in my free act 
before God. But at the same time, Jesus gave me to understand that the decision was 
completely within my power. I could do it or not do it. And so I then answered immediately, 

"J esus, I accept everything that You wish to send me; I trust in Your goodness." At that 
moment, I felt that by this act I glorified God greatly. But I armed myself with patience. As 
soon as I left the chapel, I had an encounter with reality. I do not want to describe the 
details, but there was as much of it as I was able to bear. I would not have been able to bear 
even one drop more. 

191 +One morning I heard these words in my soul: Go to Mother General [Michael] and tell

her that this thing displeases Me in such and such a house. I cannot mention what the 
thing was nor the house in question, but I did tell it to Mother General, although it cost me 
very much. 

192 Once, I took upon myself a terrible temptation which one of our students in the house at 
Warsaw was going through. It was the temptation of suicide. For seven days I suffered; and 
after the seven days Jesus granted her the grace which was being asked, and then my 
suffering also ceased. It was a great suffering. I often take upon myself the torments of our 
students. Jesus permits me to do this, and so do my confessors. 

193 My heart is a permanent dwelling place for J esus. No one but J esus has access to it. 1 1 is 
from Jesus that I derive strength to fight difficulties and oppositions. I want to be 
transformed into J esus in order to be able to give myself completely to souls. Without J esus I 
would not get near to souls, because I know what I am of myself. I absorb God into myself in 
order to give Him to souls. 



194 +March 27. I desire to struggle, toil and empty myself for our work of saving immortal souls. 
It does not matter if these efforts should shorten my life; it is no longer mine, but belongs to 
the Community. I want to be useful to the whole Church by being faithful to my Community. 

195 0 Jesus, today my soul is as though darkened by suffering. Not a single ray of light. The 
storm is raging, and Jesus is asleep. 0 my Master, I will not wake You; I will not interrupt 
Your sweet sleep. I believe that You fortify me without my knowing it. 

Throughout the long hours I adore You, 0 living Bread, amidst the great drought in my soul. 

0 Jesus, pure Love, I do not need consolations; I am nourished by Your will, 0 Mighty One! 
Your will is the goal of my existence. It seems to me that the whole world serves me and 
depends on me. You, 0 Lord, understand my soul with all its aspirations. 

J esus, when I myself cannot sing You the hymn of love, I admire the singing of the 
Seraphim, they who are so dearly loved by You. I desire to drown myself in You as they do. 
Nothing will stem such love, for no might has power over it. It is like lightning that 
illuminates the darkness, but does not remain in it. 0 my Master, shape my soul according to 
Your will and Your eternal designs! 

196 A certain person seems to have made it her task to try out my virtue in all sorts of ways. One 
day, she stopped me in the corridor and began by saying that she had no grounds for 
rebuking me, but she ordered me to stand there opposite the small chapel£631 for half an hour 
and to wait for Mother Superior, who was to pass by there after recreation, [ 64 i and I was to 
accuse myself of various things which she had told me to say. Although I had no idea of 
these things being on my soul, I was obedient and waited for Mother Superior for a full half 
hour. Each sister who passed by looked at me with a smile. When I accused myself before 
Mother Superior [Raphael], she sent me to my confessor. When I made my confession, the 
priest saw immediately that this was something that did not come from my own soul and 
that I had not the faintest idea of such things. He was very surprised that this person had 
dared to take upon herself to give such orders. 

197 0 Church of God, you are the best mother, you alone can rear a soul and cause it to grow. 

Oh, how great is my love and respect for the Church, that best of all mothers! 

198 On one occasion the Lord said to me, My daughter, your confidence and love restrain 
My justice, and I cannot inflict punishment because you hinder Me from doing so. 

Oh, how great is the power of a soul filled with confidence! 

199 When I think of my perpetual vows and Who it is that wants to be joined with me, for hours I 
become absorbed in the thought of Him. How can this be; You are God and I -I am Your 
creature. You, the Immortal King and I, a beggar and misery itself! But now all is clear to 
me; Your grace and Your love, 0 Lord, will fill the gulf between You, Jesus, and me. 

200 0 Jesus, how deeply it hurts the soul when it is always trying to be sincere and they accuse it 
of hypocrisy and behave with mistrust toward it. 0 Jesus, You also suffered like this to make 
satisfaction to Your Father. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 25 -300 


301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-52] 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1 201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231- 1321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 


Notebook 1 


201 I want to hide myself so that no creature might know my heart. Jesus, You alone know my 
heart and possess it whole and entire. No one knows our secret. We understand each other 
mutually with one look. From the moment we came to know each other I have been happy. 
Your greatness is my fullness. 0 J esus, when I am in the last place, lower than the 
postulants, even the youngest of them, then I feel that I am in my proper place. I did not 
know that the Lord had put so much happiness in these drab little corners. Now I understand 
that even in prison there can burst forth from a pure heart the fullness of love for You, 0 
Lord! External things mean nothing to pure love; it cuts through them all. Neither prison 
doors nor the gates of heaven are strong enough to stop it. It reaches God himself, and 
nothing can quench it. It knows no obstacles; it is free like a queen and has free access to all 
places. Death itself must bow its head before it.... 

202 My sister l~Wandar65i1 came to see me today. When she told me of her plans, I was horror- 
stricken. How is such a thing possible? Such a beautiful little soul before the Lord, and yet 
great darkness had come over her, and she did not know how to help herself. She had a dark 
view of everything. The good God entrusted her to my care, and for two weeks I was able to 
work with her. But how many sacrifices this soul cost me is known only to God. For no other 
soul did I bring so many sacrifices and sufferings and prayers before the throne of God as I 
did for her soul. I felt that I had forced God to grant her grace. When I reflect on all this, I 
see that it was truly a miracle. Now I can see how much power intercessory prayer has 
before God. 

203 Now, during this Lent, I often experience the Passion of the Lord J esus in my own body. I 
experience deeply in my heart all that Jesus suffered, although no exterior sign betrays these 
sufferings of mine. Only my confessor knows about them. 

204 A short conversation with Mother Directress [Margaret]. When I asked her about some 
particulars concerning progress in the spiritual life, this holy Mother answered everything 
with great clarity. She said to me, "if you continue cooperating with God's grace in this way, 
Sister, you will be only one step away from close union with God. You understand what I 
mean by this. This means that your characteristic trait should be faithfulness to the grace of 
the Lord. God does not lead all souls along such a path." 


205 +The Resurrection. Today, during the [Mass of the] Resurrection, I saw the Lord Jesus in the 
midst of a great light. He approached me and said, Peace be to you. My children, and He 
lifted up His hand and gave His blessing. The wounds in His hands, feet and side were 
indelible and shining. When He looked at me with such kindness and love, my whole soul 
drowned itself in Him. And He said to me, You have taken a great part in My Passion; 
therefore I now give you a great share in My joy and glory. The whole time of the 
Resurrection [Mass] seemed like only a minute to me. A wondrous recollection filled my soul 
and lasted throughout the whole festal season. The kindness of Jesus is so great that I 
cannot express it. 

206 The next day, after Communion, I heard the voice saying, My daughter, look into the 
abyss of My mercy and give praise and glory to this mercy of Mine. Do it in this 
way: Gather all sinners from the entire world and immerse them in the abyss of My 
mercy. I want to give Myself to souls; I yearn for souls. My daughter. On the day of 
My feast, the Feast of Mercy, you will go through the whole world and bring fainting 
souls to the spring of My mercy. I shall heal and strengthen them. 

207 I prayed today for a soul in agony, who was dying without the Holy Sacraments, although

she desired them. But it was already too late. It was a relative of mine, my uncle's wife. She 
was a soul pleasing to God. There was no distance between us at that moment. 

208 0 you small, everyday sacrifices, you are to me like wild flowers which I strew over the feet 
of my beloved Jesus. I sometimes compare these trifles to the heroic virtues, and that is 
because their enduring nature demands heroism. > 

209 In my sufferings, I do not seek help from creatures, but God is everything to me. And yet, it 
often seems that even the Lord does not hear me. I arm myself with patience and silence, 
like a dove that does not complain and feels no bitterness when its children are being taken 
away from it. I want to soar into the very heat of the sun, and I do not want to stop in its 
vapors. I will not grow weary, because it is on You that I am leaning-0 You, my Strength! 

210 I fervently beg the Lord to strengthen my faith, so that in my drab, everyday life I will not be 
guided by human dispositions, but by those of the spirit. Oh, how everything drags man 
towards the earth! But lively faith maintains the soul in the higher regions and assigns self- 
love its proper place; that is to say, the lowest one. 

211 +Once again, a terrible darkness envelops my soul. It seems to me that I am falling prey to 
illusions. When I went to confession to obtain some light and peace, I did not find these at 
all. The confessor lmi left me with even more doubts than I had before. He said to me, "I 
cannot discern what power is at work in you, Sister; perhaps it is God and perhaps it is the 
evil spirit." When I left the confessional, I started to think about his words. The longer I did 
so, the deeper my soul sank into darkness. "Jesus, what am I to do?" When Jesus 
approached me with kindness, I was frightened. "Are you really J esus?" On the one hand, I 
am drawn by love and, on the other, by fear. What torture! I cannot describe it! 

212 When I went to confession again, I got the answer, "I do not understand you, Sister. It would 
be better if you did not come to me for confession." O my God!... I have to do such violence 
to myself before I say anything about my spiritual life, and here I am getting this answer: 
"Sister, I do not understand you"! 


213 When I left the confessional, a multitude of torments oppressed me. I went before the 
Blessed Sacrament and said, "Jesus, save me; You see how weak I am!" Then I heard these 
words, I will give you help during the retreat before the vows. Encouraged by these words, I 
began to go forward without asking anyone's advice. But I distrusted myself so much that I 
made up my mind to put an end to the doubts once and for all. I therefore looked forward 
with special eagerness to the retreat before perpetual vows. But even for many days before 
the retreat, I kept on asking God to give light to the priest who would hear my confession, so 
that he could say, once and for all, either yes or no. And I thought to myself, "I'll be set at 
peace once and for all." But I continued to worry whether anyone would be willing to hear me 
out concerning all these matters. And yet again, I decided not to think about all this and to 
put my trust in the Lord. The words that continued to ring in my ears were: "during the 
retreat." 

214 Everything is now ready. Tomorrow morning we are leaving for Cracow, for the retreat. 

Today I entered the chapel to thank the Lord for the countless graces He has bestowed on 
me during these five months. My heart was deeply touched at the thought of so many graces 
and so much care on the part of the superiors. 

215 My daughter, be at peace; I am taking all these matters upon Myself. I will arrange 
all things with your superiors and with the confessor. Speak to Father Andrasz with 
the same simplicity and confidence with which you speak to Me. 

216 We have come to Cracow today [April 18, 1933]. What a joy it is to find myself again where I 
took my first steps in the spiritual life! Dear Mother Directress [Mary Joseph] is ever the 
same, cheerful and full of love of neighbor. I entered the chapel for a moment and joy filled 
my soul. In a flash I recalled the whole ocean of graces that had been given me as a novice 
here. 

217 And today we gathered together to go for an hour's visit to the novitiate. The Mother 
Directress, Mary Joseph, gave us a short talk and outlined the program of the retreat. As she

spoke these few words to us, I saw before my eyes all the good things this dear- Mother had 
done for us. I felt in my soul such profound gratitude toward her. My heart grieved at the 
thought that this was the last time I would be in the novitiate. Now I must battle together 
with Jesus, work with Jesus, suffer with Jesus; in a word, live and die with Jesus. Mother 
Directress will no longer be at my heels to teach me here, warn me there, or to admonish, 
encourage or reproach me. I am so afraid of being on my own. Jesus, do something about 
this. I will always have a superior, that's true; but now a person is left more on her own. 
Cracow, April 21, 1933 

+ For the Greater Glory of God. 

The Eight-day Retreat before Perpetual Vows. 

218 I am beginning the retreat today. Jesus, my Master, guide me. Govern me according to Your 
will, purify my love that it may be worthy of You, do with me as Your most merciful Heart 
desires. J esus, there will be just the two of us during these days until the moment of our 
union. Keep me, Jesus, in a recollected spirit! 



219 In the evening, the Lord said to me, My daughter, let nothing frighten or disconcert 
you. Remain deeply at peace. Everything is in My hands. I will give you to 
understand everything through Father Andrasz. Be like a child towards him. 

A Moment Before the Blessed Sacrament. 

220 O my eternal Lord and Creator, how am I going to thank You for this great favor; namely, 
that You have deigned to choose miserable me to be Your betrothed and that You are to 
unite me to yourself in an eternal bond? O dearest Treasure of my heart, I offer You all the 
adoration and thanksgiving of the Saints and of all the choirs of Angels, and I unite myself in 
a special way with Your Mother. O Mary, my Mother, I humbly beg of You, cover my soul with 
Your virginal cloak at this very important moment of my life, so that thus I may become 
dearer to Your Son and may worthily praise Your Son's mercy before the whole world and 
throughout all eternity. 

221 I could not understand the meditation today. My spirit was so extraordinarily immersed in 
God. I could not force myself to think about what the priest was saying during the retreat 
[conferences]. I am often unable to think according to the points; my spirit is with the Lord, 
and that is my meditation. 

222 A few words from my conference with Mother , Directress, Mary Joseph. She clarified many 
things for me, and she set me at peace as regards my spiritual life, reassuring me that I was 
on the right path. I thanked the Lord J esus for this great favor, for she is the first of the 
superiors who did not cause me any doubts in this regard. Oh, how infinitely good God is! 

223 0 living Host, my one and only strength, fountain of love and mercy, embrace the whole 
world, fortify faint souls. Oh, blessed be the instant and the moment when Jesus left us His 
most merciful Heart! 

224 To suffer without complaining, to bring comfort to others and to drown my own sufferings in 
the most Sacred Heart of Jesus! 

I will spend all my free moments at the feet of [Our Lord in] the Blessed Sacrament. At the 
feet of Jesus, I will seek light, comfort and strength. I will show my gratitude unceasingly to 
God for His great mercy towards me, never forgetting the favors He has bestowed on me, 
especially the grace of a vocation. I will hide myself among the sisters like a little violet 
among lilies. I want to blossom for my Lord and Maker, to forget about myself, to empty 
myself totally for the sake of immortal souls- this is my delight. 

+A few of my thoughts. 

225 As regards Holy Confession, I shall choose what costs and humiliates me most. Sometimes a 
trifle costs more than something greater. I will call to mind the Passion of Jesus at each 
confession, to arouse my heart to contrition. Insofar as possible with the grace of God, I will 
always practice perfect contrition. I will devote more time to this contrition. Before I 
approach the confessional, I shall first enter the open and most merciful Heart of the Savior. 
When I leave the confessional, I shall rouse in my soul great gratitude to the Holy Trinity for 
this wonderful and inconceivable miracle of mercy that is wrought in my soul. And the more 
miserable my soul is, the more I feel the ocean of God's mercy engulfing me and giving me 
strength and great power. 



226 The rules that I most often fail to obey: sometimes I break silence; disobedience to the

signal of the bell; sometimes I meddle in other people's affairs. I will do my very best to 
improve. 

I will avoid sisters who grumble, and if they cannot be avoided, I will at least keep silent 
before them, thus letting them know how sorry I am to hear such things. I must take no 
heed of the opinion of others, but obey the evidence of my own conscience and take God to 
be the witness of all my actions. I must do everything and act in all matters now as I would 
like to do and act at the hour of my death. For this reason, in every action I must be mindful 
of God. 

Avoid presumed permissions. i67i I must report [even] small things to my superiors, and do 
so in as much detail as is possible. I must be faithful in my spiritual exercises; I must not 
easily ask to be dispensed from them. I must keep silence outside the time of recreation, and 
avoid jokes and witty words that make others laugh and break silence. I must have great 
appreciation for even the most minute rules. I must not let myself become absorbed in the 
whirl of work, [but] take a break to look up to heaven. Speak little with people, but a good 
deal with God. Avoid familiarity. I must pay little attention as to who is for me and who is 
against me. I must not tell others about those things I have had to put up with. I must avoid 
speaking out loud to others during work. I must maintain peace and equanimity during times 
of suffering. In difficult moments I must take refuge in the wounds of Jesus; I must seek 
consolation, comfort, light and affirmation in the wounds of Jesus. 

227 +1 n the midst of trials I will try to see the loving hand of God. Nothing is as constant as 
suffering-it always faithfully keeps the soul company. 0 Jesus, I will let no one surpass me in 
loving You! 

+0 Jesus, hidden in the Blessed Sacrament, 

228 You see that in pronouncing my perpetual vows I am leaving the novitiate[68i today. Jesus, 
You know how weak and little I am, and so from today on, I am entering Your novitiate in a 
very special way. I continue to be a novice, but Your novice, Jesus, and You will be my 
Master to the last day. Daily I will attend lectures at Your feet. I will not do the least thing by 
myself, without consulting You first as my Master. Jesus, how happy I am that You yourself 
have drawn me and taken me into Your novitiate; that is to say, into the tabernacle. In 
making my perpetual vows, I have by no means become a perfect nun. No, no! I am still a 
weak little novice of Jesus, and I must strive to acquire perfection as I did in the first days of 
the novitiate, and I will make every effort to keep the same disposition of soul which I had on 
that first day the convent gate opened to admit me. 

With the trust and simplicity of a small child, I give myself to You today, O Lord Jesus, my 
Master. I leave You complete freedom in directing my soul. Guide me along the paths You 
wish. I won't question them. I will follow You trustingly. Your merciful Heart can do all things! 

The little novice of J esus-Sister Faustina. 


229 +At the beginning of the retreat, Jesus told me, During this retreat, I myself will direct 
your soul. I want to confirm you in peace and love. And so the first few days passed by. 
On the fourth day, doubts began to trouble me: Is not this tranquillity of mine false? Then I 
heard these words, My daughter, imagine that you are the sovereign of all the world 
and have the power to dispose of all things according to your good pleasure. You 
have the power to do all the good you want, and suddenly a little child knocks on 
your door, all trembling and in tears and, trusting in your kindness, asks for a piece 
of bread lest he die of starvation. What would you do for this child? Answer Me, my 
daughter. And I said, "Jesus, I would give the child all it asked and a thousand times more. 
"And the Lord said to me, That is how I am treating your soul. I n this retreat I am 
giving you, not only peace, but also such a disposition of soul that even if you 
wanted to experience uneasiness you could not do so. My love has taken 
possession of your soul, and I want you to be confirmed in it. Bring your ear close 
to My Heart, forget everything else, and meditate upon My wondrous mercy. My 
love will give you the strength and courage you need in these matters. 

230 Jesus, living Host, You are my Mother, You are my all! It is with simplicity and love, with faith

and trust that I will always come to You, O J esus! I will share everything with You, as a child 
with its loving mother, my joys and sorrows-in a word, everything. 

231 No one can comprehend what my heart feels when I meditate on the fact that God unites me 
with himself through the vows. God makes known to me, even now, the immensity of the 
love He already had for me before time began; and as for me, I have just begun to love Him, 
in time. His love was [ever] great, pure and disinterested, and my love for Him comes from 
the fact that I am beginning to know Him. The more I come to know Him, the more ardently, 
the more fiercely I love Him, and the more perfect my acts become. Meanwhile, each time I 
call to mind that in a few days I am to become one with the Lord through perpetual vows, a 
joy beyond all description floods my soul. From the very first time that I came to know the 
Lord, the gaze of my soul became drowned in Him for all eternity. Each time the Lord draws 
close to me and my knowledge of Him grows deeper, a more perfect love grows within my 
soul. 

232 +Before confession, I heard these words in my soul, My daughter, tell him everything 
and reveal your soul to him as you do before Me. Do not fear anything. It is to keep 
you in peace that I place this priest between your soul and Myself. The words he 
will speak to you are My words. Reveal to him your soul's greatest secrets. I will 
give him light to know your soul. 

233 When I approached the confessional, I felt so much at ease in my soul about speaking of 
everything that, later on, I myself was astounded. His answers brought a great peace into 
my soul. His words were, are, and always will be pillars of fire which enlightened and will go 
on enlightening my soul in its pursuit of the greatest sanctity. 

The directions I received from Father Andrasz I have noted on another page in this notebook 
[cf. Diary no. 55]. 



234 When I finished this confession, my spirit was immersed in God, and I prayed for three 
hours, but it seemed to me like only a few minutes. Since then, I have placed no obstacles in 
the way of grace working in my soul. J esus knew why I had been afraid to commune 
intimately with Him and was not at all offended. From the moment the priest assured me 
that what I had experienced was not an illusion, but the grace of God, I have tried to be 
faithful to God in everything. I can see now that there are few such priests who understand 
the full depth of God's work in the soul. Since then, my wings have been set free for flight, 
and I yearn to soar into the very fire of the sun. My flight will not come to an end until I rest 
in Him forever. When we fly very high, all the vapors, mists and clouds are beneath our feet, 
and our whole carnal being is necessarily subject to the spirit. 

235 O Jesus, I long for the salvation of immortal souls. It is in sacrifice that my heart will find free 
expression, in sacrifice which no one will suspect. I will burn and be consumed unseen in the 
holy flames of the love of God. The presence of God will help my sacrifice to be perfect and 
pure. 

236 Oh, how misleading are appearances, and how unjust the judgments. Oh, how often virtue 
suffers only because it remains silent. To be sincere with those who are incessantly stinging 
us demands much self-denial. One bleeds, but there are no visible wounds. O Jesus, it is only 
on the last day that many of these things will be made known. What joy-none of our efforts 
will be lost! 

237 Holy Hour. During this hour of adoration, I saw the abyss of my misery; whatever there is of 
good in me is Yours, 0 Lord. But because I am so small and wretched, I have a right to count 
on Your boundless mercy. 

238 Evening. O Jesus, tomorrow morning I am to make my perpetual vows. I had asked heaven 
and earth and had called upon all beings to thank God for this immense and inconceivable 
favor of His when suddenly I heard these words, My daughter, your heart is My heaven. 

J ust a few moments of prayer and I have to run, as they drive us out of everywhere; 
because every place-the chapel, the refectory, the recreation room and the kitchen- is being 
made ready for tomorrow, and we are to go to bed. However, sleep is out of the question. 

Joy has driven sleep away. I thought: What is it going to be like in heaven, if already here in 
exile God so fills my soul." 

239 Prayer during the Mass on the day of the perpetual vows. Today I place my heart on the

paten where Your Heart has been placed, 0 J esus, and today I offer myself together with You 
to God, Your Father and mine, as a sacrifice of love and praise. Father of Mercy, look upon 
the sacrifice of my heart, but through the wound in the Heart of Jesus. 

May 1, 1933. First Day. 

Union with Jesus on the day of perpetual vows. Jesus, from now on Your Heart is mine, and 
mine is Yours alone. The very thought of Your Name, J esus, is the delight of my heart. I truly 
would not be able to live without You, even for a moment, Jesus. Today my soul has lost 
itself in You, my only treasure. My love knows no obstacles in giving proof of itself to its 
Beloved. 

The words of Jesus during my perpetual vows: My spouse, our hearts are joined forever. 
Remember to Whom you have vowed... everything cannot be put into words. 



My petition while we were lying prostrate under the pa 1 1 . L69i I begged the Lord to grant me 
the grace of never consciously and deliberately offending Him by even the smallest sin or 
imperfection. 

Jesus, I trust in You! Jesus, I love You with all my heart! 

When times are most difficult, You are my Mother. 

For love of You, 0 J esus, I die completely to myself today and begin to live for the greater 
glory of Your Holy Name. 

+ Love, it is for love of You, 0 Most Holy Trinity, that I offer myself to You as an oblation of 
praise, as a holocaust of total self-immolation. And through this self-immolation, I desire the 
exaltation of Your Name, 0 Lord. I cast myself as a little rosebud at Your feet, 0 Lord, and 
may the fragrance of this flower be known to You alone. 

240 Three requests on the day of my perpetual vows. Jesus, I know that today You will refuse me 
nothing. 

First request: J esus, my most beloved Spouse, I beg You for the triumph of the Church, 
particularly in Russia and in Spain; for blessings on the Holy Father, Pius XI, and on all the 
clergy; for the grace of conversion for impenitent sinners. And I ask You for a special 
blessing and for light, 0 Jesus, for the priests before whom I will make my confessions 
throughout my lifetime. 

Second request :l beg Your blessings on our Congregation, and may it be filled with great 
zeal. Bless, 0 Jesus, our Mother General and our Mother Directress, all the novices and all 
the superiors. Bless my dearest parents. Bestow Your grace, 0 Jesus, on our wards; 
strengthen them so powerfully by Your grace so that those who leave our houses will no 
longer offend You by any sin. Jesus, I beg You for my homeland; protect it against the 
assaults of its enemies. 

Third requests esus, I plead with You for the souls that are most in need of prayer. I plead 
for the dying; be merciful to them. I also beg You, Jesus, to free all souls from purgatory. 

Jesus, I commend to You these particular persons: My confessors, persons recommended to 
my prayers, a certain person..., Father Andrasz, Father Czaputa, and the priest I met in 
Vilnius [Father Sopocko], who is to be my confessor, a certain soul... a certain priest, a 
certain reliqiousrzoi to whom You know how much I owe, Jesus, and all the people who have 
been recommended to my prayer. Jesus, on this day You can do everything for those for 
whom I am pleading. For myself I ask, Lord, transform me completely into Yourself, maintain 
in me a holy zeal for Your glory, give me the grace and spiritual strength to do Your holy will 
in all things. 

Thank You, o my dearest Bridegroom, for the dignity You have conferred on me, and in 
particular for the royal coat-of-arms which will adorn me from this day on and which even 
the Angels do not possess; namely, the cross, the sword and the crown of thorns. But above 
all, O my J esus, I thank You for Your Heart-it is all I need. 

Mother of God, Most Holy Mary, my Mother, You are my Mother in a special way now because 
Your beloved Son is my Bridegroom, and thus we are both Your children. For Your Son's 
sake, You have to love me. 0 Mary, my dearest Mother, guide my spiritual life in such a way 
that it will please Your Son. 


+ Holy and Omnipotent God, at this moment of immense grace by which You are uniting me 
with Yourself forever, I, mere nothingness, with the utmost gratitude, cast myself at Your 
feet like a tiny, unknown flower and, each day, the fragrance of that flower of love will 
ascend to Your throne. 

I n times of struggle and suffering, of darkness and storm, of yearning and sorrow, in times of

difficult trials, in times when nobody will understand me, when I will even be condemned and 
scorned by everyone, I will remember the day of my perpetual vows, the day of God's 
incomprehensible grace. 

J.M.J. 

Special Resolutions of the Retreat, May 1, 1933 

241 Love of neighbor. First: Helpfulness towards the sisters. Second: Do not speak about those 
who are absent, and defend the good name of my neighbor. Third: Rejoice in the success of 
others. 

242 +0 God, how much I desire to be a small child. r7ii You are my Father, and You know how 
little and weak I am. So I beg You, keep me close by Your side all my life and especially at 
the hour of my death. Jesus, I know that Your goodness surpasses the goodness of a most 
tender mother. 

243 I will thank the Lord J esus for every humiliation and will pray specially for the person who 
has given me the chance to be humiliated. I will immolate myself for the benefit of souls. I 
will not count the cost of any sacrifice. I will cast myself beneath the feet of the sisters, like a 
carpet on which they can not only tread, but also wipe their feet. My place is under the feet 
of the sisters. I will make every effort to obtain that place unnoticed by others. It is enough 
that God sees this. 

244 Now a gray, ordinary day has begun. The solemn hours of the perpetual vows have passed, 
but God's great grace has remained in my soul. I feel I am all God's; I feel I am His child, I 
feel I am wholly God's property. I experience this in a way that can be physically sensed. I 
am completely at peace about everything, because I know it is the Spouse's business to look 
after me. I have forgotten about myself completely. My trust placed in His Most Merciful 
Heart has no limit. I am continuously united with Him. It seems to me as though Jesus could 
not be happy without me, nor could I without Him. Although I understand that, being God, 

He is happy in himself and has absolutely no need of any creature, still, His goodness 
compels Him to give himself to the creature, and with a generosity which is beyond 
understanding. 


245 My Jesus, I will now strive to give honor and glory to Your Name, doing battle till the day on 
which You yourself will say, enough! Every soul You have entrusted to me, Jesus, I will try to 
aid with prayer and sacrifice, so that Your grace can work in them. 0 great lover of souls, my 
Jesus, I thank You for this immense confidence with which You have deigned to place souls in 
our care. 0 you days of work and of monotony, you are not monotonous to me at all, for 
each moment brings me new graces and opportunity to do good. 

+ [April] 25, 1933 

Monthly Permissionsr72i 

246 To enter the chapel when I pass near it. To pray in my moments of leisure. 

To accept, give or lend small things. 

To have a mid-morning and an afternoon snack. 

Sometimes I will not be able to take part in recreation. 

Sometimes I will not be able to take part in community exercises. 

Sometimes I will not be able to take part in evening and morning prayers. 

Sometimes to remain at work a little longer after nine or to make my spiritual exercises after 

nine. 

To write down something or take notes when I have a free moment. 

To telephone. 

To go out of the house. 

To visit a church when I am in town. 

To enter other sisters' cells in case of need. 

To take a drink of water occasionally outside the prescribed times. 

Small Mortifications 

To recite the Chaplet of The Divine Mercy with outstretched arms. 

On Saturday, to say five decades of the Rosary with outstretched arms. 

To sometimes recite a prayer [while] lying prostrate. 

On Thursdays, a Holy Hour. 

On Fridays, some greater mortification for dying sinners. 

247 Jesus, Friend of a lonely heart, You are my haven, You are my peace. You are my salvation, 
You are my serenity in moments of struggle and amidst an ocean of doubts. You are the 
bright ray that lights up the path of my life. You are everything to a lonely soul. You 
understand the soul even though it remains silent. You know our weaknesses, and like a 
good physician, You comfort and heal, sparing us sufferings-expert that You are. 

248 The words of the Bishop [Rospondf73i1, spoken at the ceremony of the taking of perpetual 
vows: "Accept this candle as a sign of heavenly light and of burning love." While giving the 
ring: "I betroth you to J esus Christ, the Son of the Father Most High; may He keep you

unblemished. Take this ring as a sign of the eternal covenant you are making with Christ, the 
Spouse of Virgins. May it be for you the ring of faith and the sign of the Holy Spirit, that you 
may be called the bride of Christ and, if you serve Him faithfully, be crowned [as such] for all 
eternity. 


249 +Jesus, I trust in You; I trust in the ocean of your mercy. You are a Mother to me. 


250 H-This year, 1933, is for me an especially solemn year, because in this J ubilee Year of the 
Lord's Passion, I have taken my perpetual vows. I have joined my sacrifice in a special way 
to the sacrifice of the crucified J esus, in order to thus become more pleasing to God. I do all 
things with Jesus, through Jesus, in Jesus. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101- 50 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-52] 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1001-1050 t 1051-1 100 t 1101-1150 t 1 151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-132 1 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804- 828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 1 


251 After perpetual vows, I stayed in Cracow throughout the month of May, because it was 
undecided whether I was to go to Rabka or to Vilnius. Once Mother General [Michael] asked 
me, "Why are you sitting here so quietly and not getting ready to go somewhere, Sister?" I 
answered, "I want to do God's pure will; wherever you bid me to go, dear Mother, I will know 
God's pure will for me will be there, without any admixture on my part." 

Mother General replied to this, "Very well!" The next day she summoned me and said, "You 
wanted to have God's pure will, Sister; very well, then; you are going to Vilnius." I thanked 
her and awaited the day when I would be told to go. However, my soul was filled with a 
certain joy and fear, at one and the same time. I felt that God was preparing great graces for 
me there, but also great sufferings. Yet, I stayed on in Cracow until the 27th of May. As I had 
no regular duties, I only went to help in the garden. And as it happened that I worked all 
alone for the whole month, I was able to make a J esuit retreat . lh Although I went to 
community recreation, I still managed to make the J esuit retreat. I received much light from 
God during this time. 

252 +lt was four days after my perpetual vows. I was trying to make a Holy Hour. It was the first 
Thursday of the month. As soon as I entered the chapel, God's presence enveloped me. I 
was distinctly aware that the Lord was near me. After a moment, I saw the Lord, all covered 
with wounds; and He said to me, Look at whom you have espoused. I understood the 
meaning of these words and answered the Lord, "Jesus, I love You more when I see You 
wounded and crushed with suffering like this than if I saw You in majesty." Jesus asked, 
Why? I replied, "Great majesty terrifies me, little nothing that I am, and Your wounds draw 
me to Your Heart and tell me of Your great love for me." After this conversation there was 
silence. I fixed my gaze upon His sacred wounds and felt happy to suffer with Him. I 
suffered, and yet I did not suffer, because I felt happy to know the depth of His love, and the 
hour passed like a minute. 

253 +1 must never judge anyone, but look at others with leniency and at myself with severity. I 
must refer everything to God and, in my own eyes, recognize myself for what I am: utter 
misery and nothingness. In suffering, I must be patient and quiet, knowing that everything 
passes in time. 

254 +The moments I lived through when I was taking my perpetual vows are better left unsaid. 

I am in Him, and He in me. As the Bishop [Rospond] was putting the ring on my finger, God 
pervaded my whole being, and since I cannot express that moment, I will be silent about it. 
My relationship with God, since perpetual vows, has been more intimate than it had ever 
been before. I sense that I love God and that He loves me. Having once tasted God, my soul

could not live without Him. One hour spent at the foot of the altar in the greatest dryness of 
spirit is dearer to me than a hundred years of worldly pleasures. I prefer to be a lowly drudge 
in the convent than a queen in the world. 


255 +1 will hide from people's eyes whatever good I am able to do so that God himself may be 
my reward. I will be like a tiny violet hidden in the grass, which does not hurt the foot that 
treads on it, but diffuses its fragrance and, forgetting itself completely, tries to please the 
person who has crushed it underfoot. This is very difficult for human nature, but God's grace 
comes to one's aid. 

256 +Thank You, Jesus, for the great favor of making