 so much to steep myself in His sorrowful Passion, 
but that my sufferings had not allowed me to do so. Then Jesus said to me, My daughter, 
know that if I allow you to feel and have a more profound knowledge of My 
sufferings, that is a grace from Me. But when your mind is dimmed and your 
sufferings are great, it is then that you take an active part in My Passion, and I am 
conforming you more fully to Myself. 1 1 is your task to submit yourself to My will at 
such times, more than at others... 



1698 I often attend upon the dying and through entreaties obtain for them trust in God's mercy, 
and I implore God for an abundance of divine grace, which is always victorious. God's mercy 
sometimes touches the sinner at the last moment in a wondrous and mysterious way. 
Outwardly, it seems as if everything were lost, but it is not so. The soul, illumined by a ray 
of God's powerful final grace, turns to God in the last moment with such a power of love 
that, in an instant, it receives from God forgiveness of sin and punishment, while outwardly 
it shows no sign either of repentance or of contrition, because souls [at that stage] no 
longer react to external things. Oh, how beyond comprehension is God's mercy! But-horror!- 
there are also souls who voluntarily and consciously reject and scorn this grace! Although a 
person is at the point of death, the merciful God gives the soul that interior vivid moment, 
so that if the soul is willing, it has the possibility of returning to God. But sometimes, the 
obduracy in souls is so great that consciously they choose hell; they [thus] make useless all 
the prayers that other souls offer to God for them and even the efforts of God Himself... 

1699J.M.J. 

Solitude- my favorite moments, 

Solitude- but always with You, Jesus and Lord, 

Close to Your Heart, time passes pleasantly for me, 

And, close to Him, my soul finds its repose. 

When the heart is filled with You and overflowing with love, 

And the soul burns with pure fire, 

Then, amidst the utmost desolation, the soul will not experience loneliness, 

Because it rests on Your bosom. 

0 Solitude-moments of supreme companionship, 

Though I be abandoned by all creatures, 

1 immerse myself totally in the ocean of Your Godhead, 

And You listen sweetly to my confidences. 

1700 This evening, the Lord asked me, Do you not have any desires in your heart? I 

answered, "I have one great desire, and it is to be united with You forever." And the Lord 
answered me, That will happen soon. My dearest child, your every stirring is 
reflected in My Heart. My gaze rests kindly upon you before any other creature. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101- 150 t 151-200 t 201 -250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-52] 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801 -850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1001-1050 t 1051-1 100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-132 1 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 - 1450 t 1 451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 


Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 


Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission.

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 6 


1701 I asked the Lord today that He might deign to teach me about the interior life, because of 
myself I can neither understand nor conceive anything perfectly. The Lord answered me, I 

was your Teacher, I am and I will be; strive to make your heart like unto My 
humble and gentle Heart. Never claim your rights. Bear with great calm and 
patience everything that befalls you. Do not defend yourself when you are put to 
shame, though innocent. Let others triumph. Do not stop being good when you 
notice that your goodness is being abused. I Myself will speak up for you when it 
is necessary. Be grateful for the smallest of My graces, because your gratitude 
compels Me to grant you new graces... 

1702 Towards the end of the Way of the Cross which I was making, the Lord J esus began to 
complain about the souls of religious and priests, about the lack of love in chosen souls. I 

will allow convents and churches to be destroyed. I answered, "Jesus, but there are 
so many souls praising You in convents." The Lord answered, That praise wounds My 
Heart, because love has been banished from convents. Souls without love and 
without devotion, souls full of egoism and self-love, souls full of pride and 
arrogance, souls full of deceit and hypocrisy, lukewarm souls who have just 
enough warmth to keep them alive: My Heart cannot bear this. All the graces that 
I pour out upon them flow off them as off the face of a rock. I cannot stand them, 
because they are neither good or bad. I called convents into being to sanctify the 
world through them. It is from them that a powerful flame of love and sacrifice 
should burst forth. And if they do not repent and become enkindled by their first 
love, I will deliver them over to the fate of this world... 

How can they sit on the promised throne of judgment to judge the world, when 
their guilt is greater than the guilt of the world? There is neither penance nor 
atonement. O heart, which received Me in the morning and at noon are ail ablaze 
with hatred against Me, hatred of all sorts! O heart specially chosen by Me, were 
you chosen for this, to give Me more pain? The great sins of the world are 
superficial wounds on My Heart, but the sins of a chosen soul pierce My Heart 
through and through... 

1703 When I tried to intercede for them, I could find nothing with which to excuse them and, 
being at the time unable to think of anything in their defense, my heart was seized with 
pain, and I wept bitterly. Then the Lord looked at me kindly and comforted me with these 
words: Do not cry. There are still a great number of souls who love Me very much, 
but My Heart desires to be loved by all and, because My love is great, that is why I 
warn and chastise them. 



1704 + Struggle with a certain temptation. There was a person who kept accosting me with 
flattering words, and since he knew when I went out to go to the chapel or to the veranda, 
he would bar my way. Since he did not dare approach me by himself, he found another 
person like himself, but neither of them dared approach. As I was on my way to the May 
devotions, they were already standing there where I had to pass. I hadn't yet reached them 
when I heard enticing words, directed at me. And the Lord permitted me to know the 
intentions of their hearts, which were not good. I felt they would block my way after the 
service, and then I would have to talk to them, for up to that time I hadn't said a word. 

When I left the chapel, they were there, armed and waiting for me to pass. This time, I was 
overcome with fear. Then Jesus stood by me and said, Do not fear. I am with you. Then I 
felt an extraordinary strength in my soul, which I cannot describe and, being a few steps 
from them, I said boldly and loudly, "Praised be Jesus Christ. "And they, stepping aside, 
responded, "For ever and ever. Amen." As if struck by lightning, they bowed their heads, 
not even daring to look at me. After I had passed, I could hear some malicious comments. 
Ever since that time, when this person sees me, he runs away in order not to meet me and 
I, thanks to the Lord, have been left in peace... 

1705 After Holy Mass, I went out to the garden to make my meditation, since there were not yet 
any patients in the garden at this time, and so I felt at ease. As I was meditating on the

blessings of God, my heart was burning with a love so strong that it seemed my breast 
would burst. Suddenly J esus stood before me and said, What are you doing here so 
early? I answered, "I am thinking of You, of Your mercy and Your goodness toward us. And 
You, J esus, what are You doing here?" I have come out to meet you, to lavish new 
graces on you. I am looking for souls who would like to receive My grace. 

1706 During Vespers today, the Lord gave me to know how very pleased He is with a pure and 
free heart. I felt that it is God's delight to look into such a heart... But such hearts are 
knightly hearts; their life is a constant battle... 

1707 + On my way to the veranda, I went into the chapel for a moment. My heart was plunged in 
profound adoration, praising God's incomprehensible goodness and His mercy. Then I heard 
these words in my soul: I am and will be for you such as you praise Me for being. 

You shall experience My goodness, already in this life and then, to the full, in the 
life to come. 

1708 O Christ, I am most delighted when I see that You are loved, and that Your praise and glory 
resound, especially the praise of Your mercy. 0 Christ, to the last moment of my life, I will 
not stop glorifying Your goodness and mercy. With every drop of my blood, with every beat 
of my heart, I glorify Your mercy. I long to be entirely transformed into a hymn of Your 
glory. When I find myself on my deathbed, may the last beat of my heart be a loving hymn 
in praise of Your unfathomable mercy. 

1709 + Today the Lord said to me, You shall make a three-day retreat before the coming 
of the Holy Spirit. I Myself will direct you. You shall not follow any of the rules 
required for retreats or use any books for meditation. Your task is to listen 
attentively to My words. For spiritual reading you shall read one chapter from the 
Gospel of St. J ohn. 


[Here occurs a space of a half page in the original Notebook] 



1710 May 26, [1938-Feast of the Ascension]. Today I accompanied the Lord J esus as He 
ascended into heaven. It was about noon. I was overcome by a great longing for God. It is 
a strange thing, the more I felt God's presence, the more ardently I desired Him. Then I 
saw myself in the midst of a huge crowd of disciples and apostles, together with the Mother 
of God. Jesus was telling them to... Go out into the whole world and teach in My 
name. He stretched out His hands and blessed them and disappeared in a cloud. I saw the 
longing of Our Lady. Her soul yearned for Jesus with the whole force of Her love. But She 
was so peaceful and so united to the will of God that there was not a stir in Her heart but 
for what God wanted. 

1711 When I was left alone with the Blessed Virgin, She instructed me concerning the interior life. 
She said, The soul's true greatness is in loving God and in humbling oneself in His presence, 
completely forgetting oneself and believing oneself to be nothing; because the Lord is great, 
but He is well pleased only with the humble; He always opposes the proud. 

1712 A certain person whom I have mentioned before visited me again. When I saw that she was 
beginning to get entangled in her own lies, I let her know that I knew she was lying. She 
became very embarrassed and stopped speaking. Then I spoke to her about the great 
judgments of God, and I also remarked that she was leading innocent souls astray and 
along dangerous roads. I uncovered before her everything that was in her heart. Since I 
had to overcome my own feelings in order to talk to her, to prove to Jesus that I love my 
enemies, I gave her my afternoon snack. She went away enlightened in soul, but action is 
still far away... 

1713 There are times when the Lord J esus fulfills my smallest wishes. Today I remarked that I 
would like to see some ears of grain, but that they cannot be seen from our sanatorium. 
However, one of the patients heard this remark and, on the following day, he went out into 
the field and brought me several beautiful ears of grain. My room is always adorned with 
fresh flowers, but my spirit finds satisfaction in nothing. More and more, I yearn for God. 

1714 Today I interceded earnestly with the Lord J esus for our house, that He might deign to take 
away the cross which has touched our convent. 252 The Lord answered me, Your prayers 
are accepted for other intentions. I cannot take away this cross until they 
recognize its meaning. Nevertheless, I did not stop praying.

1715 A strong temptation. The Lord gave me to know how pleasing a pure heart is to Him, and 
thereby I was given a deeper knowledge of my own misery. When I began to prepare for 
confession, strong temptations against confessors assaulted me. I did not see Satan, but I 
could sense him, his terrible anger. - "Yes, he's an ordinary man." - "Not ordinary, because 
he has the power of God." - Yes, it is not difficult for me to accuse myself of my sins. But to 
uncover the most secret depths of my heart, to give an account of the action of God's 
grace, to speak about God's every demand, about all that goes on between God and 
myself... to tell that to a man is beyond my strength. I felt I was fighting against the 
powers and I cried out: "O Christ, You and the priest are one; I will approach confession as 
if I were approaching, not a man, but You." When I entered the confessional, I began by 
disclosing my difficulties. The priest replied that the best thing I could have done was to 
disclose these temptations from the outset. However, after the confession, they took flight, 
and my soul is enjoying peace. 


1716 Once during recreation, one of the sister directresses said that the lay sisters were without 
feelings, and so could be treated stiffly. I was sorry to see that the sister directresses know 
so little about the lay sisters and judge them only from appearances. 

1717 Today, I was talking with the Lord, and He said to me, There are souls with whom I can 
do nothing. They are souls that are continuously observing others, but know 
nothing of what is going on within their own selves. They talk about others 
continually, even during times of grand silence, which is reserved for speaking 
only with Me. Poor souls, they do not hear My words; their interior remains empty. 
They do not look for Me within their own hearts, but in idle talk, where I am never 
to be found. They sense their emptiness, but they do not recognize their own guilt, 
while souls in whom I reign completely are a constant source of remorse to them. 

I nstead of correcting themselves, their hearts swell with envy, and if they do not 
come to their senses, they plunge in even deeper. A heart, which thus far is 
envious, now begins to be filled with hate. And they are already at the edge of the 
precipice. They are jealous of my gifts in other souls, but they themselves are 
unable " and unwilling to accept them. 

1718 To stay at Your feet, 0 hidden God, 

Is the delight and paradise of my soul. 

Here, You give me to know You, 0 incomprehensible One, 

And You speak to me sweetly: Give Me, give Me your heart. 

Silent conversation, alone with You, 

Is to experience what heavenly beings enjoy, 

And to say to God, "I will, I will give You my heart, O Lord," 

While You, O great and incomprehensible One, accept it graciously. 

Love and sweetness are my soul's life, 

And Your unceasing presence in my soul. 

I live on earth in constant rapture, 

And like a Seraph I repeat, "Hosanna!" 

0 You Who are hidden, body, soul and divinity, 

Under the fragile form of bread, 

You are my life from Whom springs an abundance of graces; 

And, for me, You surpass the delights of heaven. 

When You unite Yourself with me in Communion, 0 God, 

1 then feel my unspeakable greatness, 

A greatness which flows from You, 0 Lord, I humbly confess, 

And despite my misery, with Your help, I can become a saint. 

1719 + During Holy Mass, I came to know that a certain priest does not effect much in souls 
because he thinks about himself and so is alone. God's grace takes flight; he relies on 
trifling external things, which have no importance in the eyes of God; and, being proud, he 
fritters away his time, wearing himself out to no purpose. 



1720 There are moments when J esus gives me knowledge within my soul, and then everything 
that exists on earth is at my service: friends, enemies, success, adversity... all things, 
willing or not, must serve me. I do not think of them at all; I strive to be faithful to God and 
to love Him to the point of complete forgetfulness of self. And He Himself looks after me 
and fights against my enemies. 

1721 After Holy Communion, when I had welcomed J esus into my heart, I said to Him, "My Love, 
reign in the most secret recesses of my heart, there where my most secret thoughts are 
conceived, where You alone have free access, in this deepest sanctuary where human

thought cannot penetrate. May You alone dwell there, and may everything I do exteriorly 
take its origin in You. I ardently desire, and I am striving with all the strength of my soul, to 
make You, Lord, feel at home in this sanctuary." 

1722 I heard these words: If you did not tie My hands, I would send down many 
punishments upon the earth. My daughter, your look disarms My anger. Although 
your lips are silent, you call out to Me so mightily that all heaven is moved. I 
cannot escape from your requests, because you pursue Me, not from afar but 
within your own heart. 

1723 When the soul of a certain young lady came to me one night, she made me aware of her 
presence, and made known to me that she needed my prayer. I prayed for a while, but her 
spirit did not leave me. Then I thought to myself, "If you are a good spirit, leave me in 
peace, and the indulgences I will gain tomorrow will be for you." At that moment, the spirit 
left my room, and I recognized that she was in purgatory. 

1724 Today I felt the Lord's Passion in my body more than at any other time. I felt this was for 
the sake of a dying soul. 

1725 Today, the Lord has been teaching me, once again, how I am to approach the Sacrament of 
Penance: My daughter, just as you prepare in My presence, so also you make your 
confession before Me. The person of the priest is, for Me, only a screen. Never 
analyze what sort of a priest it is that I am making use of; open your soul in 
confession as you would to Me, and I will fill it with My light. 

1726 Christ and Lord, You are leading me over such precipices that, when I look at them, I am 
filled with fright, but at the same time I am at peace as I nestle close to Your heart. Close 
to Your Heart, I fear nothing. In these dangerous moments, I act like a little child, carried in 
its mother's arms; when it sees something which menaces it, it clasps its mother's neck 
more firmly and feels secure. 

1727 + I often see snares laid for me by souls who should not do so. I do not defend myself, but 
entrust myself all the more to God, who sees within me. And I see how these souls become 
entangled in their own snares. 0 God, how just and good You are! 



1728 Write: I am Thrice Holy, and I detest the smallest sin. I cannot love a soul which is 
stained with sin; but when it repents, there is no limit to My generosity toward it. 
My mercy embraces and justifies it. With My mercy, I pursue sinners along all 
their paths, and My Heart rejoices when they return to Me. I forget the bitterness 
with which they fed My Heart and rejoice at their return. 

Tell sinners that no one shall escape My Hand; if they run away from My Merciful 
Heart, they will fail into My J ust Hands. Tell sinners that I am always waiting for 
them, that I listen intently to the beating of their heart... when will it beat for Me? 
Write, that I am speaking to them through their remorse of conscience, through 
their failures and sufferings, through thunderstorms, through the voice of the 
Church. And if they bring all My graces to naught, I begin to be angry with them, 
leaving them alone and giving them what they want. 

1729 0 my Jesus, You alone know of my efforts. I seem to be a bit better, but better only to the 
point that I can go out on the veranda instead of lying in bed. I see and am fully aware of 
what is happening to me. Despite the diligent care of my superiors and the efforts of the 
doctors, my health is fading and running out. But I rejoice greatly at Your call, my God, my 
Love, because I know that my mission will begin at the moment of my death. Oh, how 
much I desire to be set free from the bonds of this body. 0 my J esus, You know that, in all 
my desires, I always want to see Your will. Of myself, I would not want to die one minute 
sooner, or to live one minute longer, or to suffer less, or to suffer more, but I only want to 
do Your holy will. Although I have great enthusiasm, and the desires burning in my heart 
are immense, they are never above Your will. 

1730 I fly to Your mercy, Compassionate God, who alone are good. Although my misery is great, 
and my offenses are many, I trust in Your mercy, because You are the God of mercy; and, 
from time immemorial, it has never been heard of, nor do heaven or earth remember, that 
a soul trusting in Your mercy has been disappointed. 

0 God of compassion, You alone can justify me, and You will never reject me when I,

contrite, approach Your Merciful Heart, where no one has ever been refused, even if he 
were the greatest sinner. 

1731 Today I was awakened by a great storm. The wind was raging, and it was raining in 
torrents, thunderbolts striking again and again. I began to pray that the storm would do no 
harm, when I heard the words: Say the chaplet I have taught you, and the storm will 
cease. I began immediately to say the chaplet and hadn't even finished it when the storm 
suddenly ceased, and I heard the words: Through the chaplet you will obtain 
everything, if what you ask for is compatible with My will. 

1732 As I was praying for Poland, I heard the words: I bear a special love for Poland, and if 
she will be obedient to My will, I will exalt her in might and holiness. From her will 
come forth the spark that will prepare the world for My final coming. 



1733 + Welcome, hidden Love, life of my soul! I welcome You, Jesus, under these insignificant 
forms of bread. Welcome, sweetest Mercy, who pour Yourself out for souls. Welcome, 

Infinite Goodness, who pour out everywhere torrents of Your graces. Welcome, 0 veiled 
Brightness, the Light of souls. Welcome, O Fount of inexhaustible mercy, O purest Spring 
from which life and holiness gush forth for us. Welcome, Delight of pure souls. Welcome, 
only Hope of sinful souls. 

1734 O my J esus, You know that there are times when I have neither lofty thoughts nor a soaring 
spirit. I bear with myself patiently and admit that that is just what I am, because all that is 
beautiful is a grace from God. And so I humble myself profoundly and cry out for Your help; 
and the grace of visitation is not slow in coming to the humble heart. 

1735 O virgin, lovely flower, 

You will not remain much longer in this world. 

Oh, how beautiful your loveliness, 

My pure bride! 

No numbers can count you. 

How dear is your virginal flower! 

Your brightness is in no way dimmed; 

It is brave, strong, invincible. 

The very blaze of the noon-day sun 

Dims, and darkens in the presence of a virgin heart. 

I see nothing greater than virginity. 

It is a flower taken from the Divine Heart. 

0 gentle virgin, fragrant rose, 

Although there are many crosses on earth, 

No eye has seen, nor has it entered into the mind of man 
What awaits a virgin in heaven. 

O virgin, snow-white lily, 

You live wholly for J esus alone 

And in the pure chalice of your heart 

Is a pleasing dwelling place for God Himself. 

O virgin, no one will sing your hymn. 

In your song lies hidden the love of God. 

Even the Angels do not comprehend 
What the virgins sing to God. 

O virgin, your flower of paradise 
Eclipses all the splendors of this world. 

And although the world cannot comprehend you, 

It bows humbly before you. 

Although the virgin's path is strewn with thorns, 

And her life bristles with many a cross, 

Who is as brave as she? 

Nothing will break her; she is invincible. 



0 virgin, earthly angel, 

Your greatness is renowned throughout the Church. 

You stand guard before the tabernacle 
And, like a Seraph, become all love. 

1736 Once, when I was on the veranda, I saw that a certain person was being troubled by strong 
temptations concerning Holy Confession, doubting its secrecy. Although I knew the 
condition of that soul, I myself did not start the conversation. When we were alone, she 
opened her heart to me and told me everything. After talking for a short while, she said to 
me, "I am at peace now; my soul has received much light." 

1737 Today, J esus made known to me that I should speak little with a certain religious sister. A 
special grace of God sustained me during the conversation, which would not otherwise have 
been for God's glory. 

1738 The Lord said to me, Enter into purgatory often, because they need you there. O my 

J esus, I understand the meaning of these words which You are speaking to me, but first let 
me enter the treasury of Your mercy. 

1739 Write, My daughter, that I am mercy itself for the contrite soul. A soul's greatest 
wretchedness does not enkindle Me with wrath; but rather. My Heart is moved 
towards it with great mercy. 

1740 0 my Jesus, give me strength to endure suffering so that I I may not make a wry face when 

1 drink the cup of bitterness. Help me Yourself to make my sacrifice pleasing to You. May it 
not be tainted by my self-love, even though it extend over many years. May purity of

intention make it pleasing to You, fresh and full of life. This life of mine is a ceaseless 
struggle, a constant effort to do Your holy will; but may everything that is in me, both my 
misery and my strength, give praise to You, O Lord. 

The I nfinite Goodness of God in the Creation of the Angels. 

1741 O God, who are happiness in Your very self and have no need of creatures to make You 
happy, because of Yourself You are the fullness of love; yet, out of Your fathomless mercy 
You call creatures into being and grant them a share in Your eternal happiness and in Your 
life, that divine indwelling life which You live, One God in Three Persons. In Your 
unfathomable mercy, You have created angelic spirits and admitted them to Your love and 
to Your divine intimacy. You have made them capable of eternal love. Although You 
bestowed on them so generously, O Lord, the splendor of love and beauty, Your fullness 
was not diminished in the least, O God, nor have their love and beauty completed You, 
because You are everything in Yourself. And if You have allowed them to participate in Your 
happiness and to exist and to love You, that is only due to the abyss of Your mercy. This is 
Your unfathomable goodness, for which they glorify You without end, humbling themselves 
at the feet of Your majesty as they chant their eternal hymn: Holy, Holy, Holy... 



1742 Be praised, merciful God, One God in the Holy Trinity, 

Unfathomable, infinite, incomprehensible, 

immersing themselves in You, their minds cannot comprehend You, 

So they repeat without end their eternal: Holy. 

Be glorified, 0 merciful Creator of ours, O Lord, 

Omnipotent, but full of compassion, inconceivable. 

To love You is the mission of our existence, 

Singing our eternal hymn: Holy... 

Be blessed, merciful God, Eternal Love. 

You are above the heavens, the saphires, the firmaments. 

The host of pure spirits sings You praises, 

With its eternal hymn: Thrice Holy. 

And, gazing upon You, face to face, O God, 

I see that You could have called other creatures before them. 

Therefore they humble themselves before You in great humility, 

For well they see that this grace comes solely from Your mercy. 

One of the most beautiful spirits would not recognize Your mercy, 

And, blinded by his pride, he drew others after him. 

Angel of great beauty, he became Satan 

And was cast down in one moment from heaven's heights into hell. 

Then the faithful spirits cried, "Glory to God's mercy!" 

And they stood firm in spite of the fiery test. 

Glory to J esus, the Christ abased, 

Glory to His Mother, the humble and pure Virgin. 

After this battle, the pure spirits plunged into the ocean of Divinity; 

Contemplating and praising the depths of His mercy, 

They drown in His mercy and manifold light, 

Possessing in knowledge the Trinity of Persons, the Oneness of Godhead. 

1743 + God's Infinite Goodness in Creating Mankind. 

God, who in Your mercy have deigned to call man from nothingness into being, generously 
have You bestowed upon him nature and grace. But that seemed too little for Your infinite 
goodness. In Your mercy, O Lord, You have given us everlasting life. You admit us to Your 
everlasting happiness and grant us to share in Your interior life. And You do this solely out 
of Your mercy. You bestow on us the gift of Your grace, only because You are good and full 
of love. You had no need of us at all to be happy, but You, O Lord, want to share Your own 
happiness with us. But man did not stand the test. You could have punished him, like the 
angels, with eternal rejection, but here Your mercy appeared, and the very depths of Your 
being were moved with great compassion, and You promised to restore our salvation. It is 
an incomprehensible abyss of Your compassion that You did not punish us as we deserved. 
May Your mercy be glorified, 0 Lord; we will praise it for endless ages. And the angels were 
amazed at the greatness of the mercy which You have shown for mankind... 



1744 May You be adored, 0 merciful God of ours, 

O All-powerful Lord and Creator. 

In deepest humility, we give You praise, 

Plunging ourselves into the ocean of Your Godhead. 

But man did not persevere in the hour of trial. 

At the instigation of the evil one, he became unfaithful to You. 

He lost Your grace and gifts; only misery was left him, 

And tears, suffering, sorrow and bitterness, until he would rest in the grave.

But you, O merciful God, did not let humanity perish, 

And gave it the promise of a Redeemer. 

You did not let us despair, despite our grave offenses, 

And You sent Your prophets to Israel. 

Still, day and night, mankind cries out to You, 

From the abyss of misery, sin and all pain. 

Hear the moaning and the tears, You who reign in heaven, 

God of great mercy, God of compassion. 

Man erred, but he cannot ask pardon, 

Because a gaping chasm has appeared between God and man. 

With the voice of his misery, he cries out, "Mercy!" 

But Yahweh is silent... and century after century passes on. 

But the longing of all humankind grows deeper. 

A longing for Him who has been promised. 

Come, Lamb of God, take away our vile sins, 

Come, illumine our darkness like a ray of light. 

Humanity calls out to You unceasingly, 0 Lord of lords, 

Calls out to Your unfathomable mercy, to Your compassion. 

O great Yahweh, grant that we may make atonement, 

Remember Your goodness, and forgive us our sins. 

+The Infinite Goodness of God in Sending Us His Only-Begotten Son. 

1745 God, You did not destroy man after his fall, but in Your mercy You forgave him, You forgave 
in a divine way; that is, not only have You absolved him from guilt, but You have bestowed 
upon him every grace. Mercy has moved You to deign to descend among us and lift us up 
from our misery. God will descend to earth; the Immortal Lord of lords will abase Himself. 
But where will You descend, Lord; will it be to the temple of Solomon? Or will You have a 
new tabernacle built for Yourself? Where do You intend to come down? O Lord, what kind of 
tabernacle shall we prepare for You, since the whole earth is Your footstool? 

You have indeed prepared a tabernacle for Yourself: the Blessed Virgin. Her Immaculate 
Womb is Your dwelling place, and the inconceivable miracle of Your mercy takes place, 0 
Lord. The Word becomes flesh; God dwells among us, the Word of God, Mercy Incarnate. By 
Your descent, You have lifted us up to Your divinity. Such is the excess of Your love, the 
abyss of Your mercy. Heaven is amazed at the superabundance of Your love. No one fears 
to approach You now. You are the God of mercy. You have compassion on misery. You are 
our God, and we are Your people. You are our Father, and we are Your children by grace. 
Praise be to Your mercy, that You have deigned to descend among us. 



1746 Be adored, O God of mercy, 

Because You have deigned to descend from heaven to earth. 

Most humbly we adore You 

For Your having vouchsafed to exalt all mankind. 

Unfathomable and incomprehensible in Your mercy, 

For love of us You take on flesh 

From the Immaculate Virgin, ever untouched by sin, 

Because You have willed it so from all ages. 

The Blessed Virgin, that Snow-White Lily, 

I s first to praise the omnipotence of Your mercy. 

Her pure heart opens with love for the coming of the Word; 

She believes the words of God's messenger and is confirmed in trust. 

Heaven is astounded that God has become man, 

That there is on earth a heart worthy of God Himself. 

Why is it that You do not unite Yourself with a Seraph, but with a sinner, 0 Lord? 

Oh, because, despite the purity of the virginal womb, this is a mystery of Your mercy. 

0 mystery of God's mercy, O God of compassion, 

That You have deigned to leave the heavenly throne 
And to stoop down to our misery, to human weakness, 

For it is not the angels, but man who needs mercy. 

To give worthy praise to the Lord's mercy, 

We unite ourselves with Your Immaculate Mother, 

For then our hymn will be more pleasing to You, 

Because She is chosen from among men and angels. 

Through Her, as through a pure crystal, 

Your mercy was passed on to us. 

Through Her, man became pleasing to God; 

Through Her, streams of grace flowed down upon us. 

+ God's Infinite Goodness in Redeeming Man. 

1747 God, You could have saved thousands of worlds with one word; a single sigh from Jesus 
would have satisfied Your justice. But You Yourself, Jesus, purely out of love for us, 
underwent such a terrible Passion. Your Father's justice would have been propitiated with a 
single sigh from You, and all Your self-abasement is solely the work of Your mercy and Your 
inconceivable love. On leaving the earth, O Lord, You wanted to stay with us, and so You 
left us Yourself in the Sacrament of the Altar, and You opened wide Your mercy to us. There

is no misery that could exhaust You; You have called us all to this fountain of love, to this 
spring of God's compassion. Here is the tabernacle of Your mercy, here is the remedy for all 
our ills. To You, O living spring of mercy, all souls are drawn; some like deer, thirsting for 
Your love, others to wash the wound of their sins, and still others, exhausted by life, to 
draw strength. At the moment of Your death on the Cross, You bestowed upon us eternal 
life; allowing Your most holy side to be opened, You opened an inexhaustible spring of 
mercy for us, giving us Your dearest possession, the Blood and Water from Your Heart. 

Such is the omnipotence of Your mercy. From it all grace flows to us. 



1748 Be adored, 0 God, in the work of Your mercy, 

Be blessed by all faithful hearts 

On whom Your gaze rests, 

In whom dwells Your immortal life. 

0 my Jesus, have mercy, sorrowful was Your life on this earth, 

And in terrible torment Your work came to an end, 

Hanging stretched out on the wood of the Cross, 

And all this for the love of our souls. 

In Your inconceivable love, You allowed Your most holy side to be opened, 

And streams of Blood and Water gushed forth from Your Heart. 

Here is the living fountain of Your mercy, 

Here souls receive consolation and refreshment. 

In the Blessed Sacrament, You left us Your mercy; 

Your love deigned to arrange it so, 

That, going through life, suffering and toil, 

1 might never doubt of Your goodness and mercy. 

For even if the whole world's miseries weighed on my soul, 

We must not doubt for even a moment, 

But have trust in the power of God's mercy, 

Because, with graciousness, God receives a contrite soul. 

O unspeakable mercy of our Lord, 

Source of compassion and all sweetness, 

Trust, trust, O soul, though you are stained by sin, 

For when you approach God, you will not taste bitterness. 

Because He is a living fire of great love, 

When we approach Him with sincerity, 

Our miseries, sins and evil deeds vanish; 

He will settle our debts when we surrender ourselves to Him. 

1749 + God's Infinite Goodness in Adorning the Whole World with Beauty 
in Order to Make Man's Stay on Earth Pleasant. 

O God, how generously Your mercy is spread everywhere, and You have done all this for 
man. Oh, how much You must love him, since Your love is so active on his behalf. O my 
Creator and Lord, I see on all sides the trace of Your hand and the seal of Your mercy, 
which embraces all created things. O my most compassionate Creator, I want to give You 
worship on behalf of all creatures and all inanimate creation; I call on the whole universe to 
glorify Your mercy. Oh, how great is Your goodness, 0 God! 



1750 Be adored, 0 our Creator and Lord. 

0 universe, humbly glorify your God; 

Thank your Creator to the best of your powers 
And praise God's incomprehensible mercy. 

Come, 0 earth, in all your fine greenery; 

Come, you too, O fathomless sea. 

Let your gratitude become a loving song , 

And sing the greatness of God's mercy. 

Come, beautiful, radiant sun. 

Come, bright dawn which precedes it. 

Join in one hymn, and let your clear voices 
Sing in one accord God's great mercy. 

Come, hills and valleys, sighing woods and thickets, 

Come, lovely flowers of morningtide; 

Let your unique scent 
Adore and glorify God's mercy. 

Come, all you lovely things of earth, 

Which man does not cease to wonder at. 

Come, adore God in your harmony, 

Glorifying God's inconceivable mercy. 

Come, indelible beauty of all the earth, 

And, with great humility, adore your Creator, 

For all things are locked in His mercy, 

With one mighty voice all things cry out; how great is the mercy of God. 

But above all these beauties, 

A more pleasing praise to God 

Is a soul innocent and filled with childlike trust, 

Which, through grace, is closely bound to Him. 


Notebook I: 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-52] 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1 001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1 151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-1321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401- 1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 


Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 


Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul

(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 6 


1751 + 0 J esus, concealed in the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, my only love and mercy, I 
commend to You all the needs of my body and soul. You can help me, because You are 
Mercy itself. In You lies all my hope. 

[In the original there follows a completely blank page.] 

+ J .M.J . Cracow- Pradnik, J une 2, 1938 

Three- day Retreat. 

1752 Under the direction of Master J esus, who Himself commanded me to make this retreat, and 
who selected the days on which I was to make it; namely, the three days preceding 
Pentecost and who, Himself, conducted this retreat. However, I asked my confessor 
[probably Father Andrasz] whether I could make such a retreat, and I received his 
permission. I also asked Mother Superior [Irene] and received her permission too. I had 
resolved that I would not make the retreat unless I obtained the permission of the 
Superiors. I began a novena to the Holy Spirit, and waited for Mother Superior's answer. 

I should be beginning the retreat today, but I have not yet received news of Mother 
Superior's decision. When I went to Church for the evening devotions, I saw the Lord Jesus 
during the litany. My daughter, we are beginning the retreat. I answered, "Jesus, my 
dearest Master, I ask Your forgiveness, but I cannot make the retreat, because I have 
received no news as to whether Mother Superior allows it or not." Do not worry. My 
daughter, the Superior has given her permission. You will learn of it tomorrow 
morning. But we are to start the retreat today. 

And indeed, Mother Superior had telephoned that evening to the sister who is looking after 
me during my illness [Sister David], asking her to tell me that I was allowed to make the 
retreat, but the sister had forgotten to tell me. It was only next morning that she told me, 
and she was very apologetic that she had not told me the day before. I answered her, 
"Please do not worry. I have already started my retreat, according to the Superior's wish." 

+The First Day. 

1753 In the evening, Jesus gave me the subject for meditation. At the first moment, my heart 
was filled with fear and joy. Then I pressed myself close to His Heart, and the fear 
vanished; only joy remained. I felt entirely like a child of God, and the Lord said to me, 

Fear nothing. What has been forbidden to others has been given to you. The 
graces that are not given to other souls to discern, not even from a distance, 
nourish you every day, like the daily bread. 



1754 Consider, My daughter, Who it is to whom your heart is so closely united by the 
vows. Before I made the world, I loved you with the love your heart is 
experiencing today and, throughout the centuries. My love will never change. 

1755 Application. At the very thought of Him to whom my heart is wedded, my soul entered into 
profound recollection, and the hour passed like a minute. In this state of recollection, I 
came to know the attributes of God. Burning with an inner fire of love, I went out to the 
garden to cool off; when I looked up at the heavens, a new flame of love flooded my heart. 

1756 Then I heard the words: My daughter, have you exhausted the subject I gave you? If 
so. I'll give you a new one. I answered, "0 Infinite Majesty, eternity will not be enough 
for me to come to know You... But my love for You has become more intense. As a token of 
gratitude, I lay my heart at Your feet, like a rosebud. May its fragrance delight Your Divine 
Heart, now and for eternity... What a paradise it is for a soul when the heart knows itself to 
be so loved by God..." 

1757 Today, you will read chapter fifteen of the Gospel of Saint J ohn. I want you to read 
it very slowly. 

Second Meditation. 

1758 My daughter, consider the life of God which is found in the Church for the 
salvation and the sanctification of your soul. Consider the use that you make of 
these treasures of grace, of these efforts of My love. 

1759 Application: O most compassionate J esus, I have not always known how to profit from these 
priceless gifts, because I have paid too little attention to the gift itself and too much to the 
vessel in which You were giving me Your gifts. My most sweet Master, it will be different

from now on. I will put Your gifts to the best use of which my soul is capable. Living faith 
will support me. Whatever the form might be, under which You send me Your grace, I will 
accept it as coming directly from You, without considering the vessel in which You send it. If 
it will not always be within my power to accept it with joy, I will always accept it with 
submission to Your holy will. 

Conference on Spiritual Warfare. 

1760 My daughter, I want to teach you about spiritual warfare. Never trust in yourself, 
but abandon yourself totally to My will. I n desolation, darkness and various 
doubts, have recourse to Me and to your spiritual director. He will always answer 
you in My name. Do not bargain with any temptation; lock yourself immediately in 
My Heart and, at the first opportunity, reveal the temptation to the confessor. Put 
your self-love in the last place, so that it does not taint your deeds. Bear with 
yourself with great patience. Do not neglect interior mortifications. Always justify 
to yourself the opinions of your superiors and of your confessor. Shun murmurers 
like a plague. Let all act as they like; you are to act as I want you to. 

Observe the rule as faithfully as you can. If someone causes you trouble, think 
what good you can do for the person who caused you to suffer. Do not pour out 
your feelings. Be silent when you are rebuked. Do not ask everyone's opinion, but 
only the opinion of your confessor; be as frank and simple as a child with him. Do 
not become discouraged by ingratitude. Do not examine with curiosity the roads 



down which I lead you. When boredom and discouragement beat against your 
heart, run away from yourself and hide in My heart. Do not fear struggle; courage 
itself often intimidates temptations, and they dare not attack us. 

Always fight with the deep conviction that I am with you. Do not be guided by 
feeling, because it is not always under your control; but all merit lies in the will. 
Always depend upon your superiors, even in the smallest things. I will not delude 
you with prospects of peace and consolations; on the contrary, prepare for great 
battles. Know that you are now on a great stage where all heaven and earth are 
watching you. Fight like a knight, so that I can reward you. Do not be unduly 
fearful, because you are not alone. 

Second Day. 

1761 My daughter, today consider My Sorrowful Passion in all its immensity. Consider it 
as if it had been undertaken for your sake alone. 

1762 Application: When I began to immerse myself in the Divine Passion, the great worth of the 
human soul and the great evil of sin were revealed to me. I understood that I did not know 
how to suffer. In order to gain merit for my suffering, I will unite myself more closely, in 
suffering, to the Passion of the Lord J esus, asking of Him grace for dying souls, so that the 
mercy of God may embrace them in this grave moment. 

Second Meditation. 

1763 My daughter, consider the rule and the vows which you have offered to Me. You 
know how highly I value them; all the graces that I have for the souls of religious 
are connected with the rule and the vows. 

1764 Application: 0 my Jesus, I feel guilty of many imperfections on this score but, by Your 
grace, I do not recall any conscious and voluntary transgression of the rule or the religious 
vows. Continue to guard me, O my good J esus, for of myself I am weak. 

1765 Today, My daughter, for your reading you shall take chapter nineteen of Saint 
John's Gospel, and read it, not only with your lips, but with your heart... 

1766 During this reading, my soul was filled with deep repentance. I saw all the ingratitude of 
creatures toward their Creator and Lord; I asked God to protect me from spiritual blindness. 

Conference on Sacrifice and Prayer. 



1767 My daughter, I want to instruct you on how you are to rescue souls through 
sacrifice and prayer. You will save more souls through prayer and suffering than 
will a missionary through his teachings and sermons alone. I want to see you as a 
sacrifice of living love, which only then carries weight before Me. You must be 
annihilated, destroyed, living as if you were dead in the most secret depths of 
your being. You must be destroyed in that secret depth where the human eye has 
never penetrated; then will I find in you a pleasing sacrifice, a holocaust full of 
sweetness and fragrance. And great will be your power for whomever you

intercede. Outwardly, your sacrifice must look like this: silent, hidden, permeated 
with love, imbued with prayer. I demand. My daughter, that your sacrifice be pure 
and full of humility, that I may find pleasure in it. I will not spare My grace, that 
you may be able to fulfill what I demand of you. 

I will now instruct you on what your holocaust shall consist of, in everyday life, so 
as to preserve you from illusions. You shall accept all sufferings with love. Do not 
be afflicted if your heart often experiences repugnance and dislike for sacrifice. All 
its power rests in the will, and so these contrary feelings, far from lowering the 
value of the sacrifice in My eyes, will enhance it. Know that your body and soul 
will often be in the midst of fire. Although you will not feel My presence on some 
occasions, I will always be with you. Do not fear; My grace will be with you... 

Third Day. 

1768 My daughter, in this meditation, consider the love of neighbor. I s your love for 
your neighbor guided by My love? Do you pray for your enemies? Do you wish well 
to those who have, in one way or another, caused you sorrow or offended you? 

Know that whatever good you do to any soul, I accept it as if you had done it to 
Me. 

1769 Application: 0 J esus, my Love, You know that it has only been for a short while that I have 
acted toward my neighbor guided solely by Your love. You alone know of my efforts to do 
this. It comes to me more easily now, but if You Yourself did not kindle that love in my soul, 
I would not be able to persevere in this. This is due to Your Eucharistic love which daily sets 
me afire. 

Second Meditation. 

1770 Now you shall consider My love in the Blessed Sacrament. Here, I am entirely 
yours, soul, body and divinity, as your Bridegroom. You know what love demands: 
one thing only, reciprocity... 

1771 Application: 0 my J esus, You know that I desire to love You with a love that no soul has 
ever before loved You with. I would like the whole world to be transformed into love for 
You, my Betrothed. You feed me with the honey and milk of Your Heart. From my earliest 
years, You reared me for Yourself alone, so that I would know how to love You now. You 
know that I love You, because You alone know the depth of the sacrifice I offer You each 
day. 



1772 Jesus said to me, My daughter, have you any difficulties in this retreat? I answered 
that I hadn't. In this retreat, my mind is like lightning. I penetrate all the mysteries of faith 
with great ease. My Master and Leader, all darkness disappears from my mind under the 
ray of Your light. 

1773 Today, for your spiritual reading, you will take the Gospel of Saint J ohn, chapter 
twenty-one. Let if feed your heart more than your mind. 

1774 + During the J une devotions, the Lord said to me, My daughter, My favor rests in your 
heart. When on Holy Thursday I left Myself in the Blessed Sacrament, you were 
very much on My mind. 

1775 After these words, my love made great efforts to express to Him what He was to me, but I 
was at a loss for words and burst into tears in my helplessness. And J esus said, For you, I 
am mercy itself; therefore I ask you to offer Me your misery and this very 
helplessness of yours and, in this way, you will delight My Heart. 

1776 Today, a living flame of divine love entered my soul; if it had lasted any longer, I would 
have been consumed by the fire, freeing myself of the bonds of the present. It seemed to 
me that, if it had lasted an instant longer, I would have been drowned in the ocean of love. 

I cannot describe these arrows of love that pierce my soul. 

+ Conference on Mercy. 

1777 My daughter, know that My Heart is mercy itself. From this sea of mercy, graces 
flow out upon the whole world. No soul that has approached Me has ever gone 
away unconsoied. All misery gets buried in the depths of My mercy, and every 
saving and sanctifying grace flows from this fountain. My daughter, I desire that 
your heart be an abiding place of My mercy. I desire that this mercy flow out upon 
the whole world through your heart. Let no one who approaches you go away 
without that trust in My mercy which I so ardently desire for souls. 

Pray as much as you can for the dying. By your entreaties, obtain for them trust in 
My mercy, because they have most need of trust, and have it the least. Be assured 
that the grace of eternal salvation for certain souls in their final moment depends

on your prayer. You know the whole abyss of My mercy, so draw upon it for 
yourself and especially for poor sinners. Sooner would heaven and earth turn into 
nothingness than would My mercy not embrace a trusting soul. 

1778 My resolution continues to be the same: to unite myself to Christ-Mercy. 

Conclusion of the Retreat. 

Last Conversation with the Lord. 

1779 Thank you, Eternal Love, for Your inconceivable kindness to me, that You would occupy 
Yourself directly with my sanctification. - My daughter, let three virtues adorn you in a 
particular way: humility, purity of intention and love. Do nothing beyond what I 
demand of you, and accept everything that My hand gives you. Strive for a life of 
recollection so that you can hear My voice, which is so soft that only recollected 
souls can hear it... 



1780 I could not sleep until midnight today, so deeply was I stirred by tomorrow's renewal of 
vows. The greatness of God embraced my whole being. 

Pentecost [June 5, 1938].