 sometimes He is 
very joyous, and sometimes He is not even looking at the chapel. At present, He is often very 
joyful when our confessor [Father Sopocko] offers Holy Mass. I was greatly surprised that the 
Infant Jesus loves him so much. Sometimes I see Him dressed in a colorful pinafore. ni6i 

563 Before I came to Vilnius and met this confessor, I once saw a rather small church and near it, 
this congregation, inn The convent had twelve cells: each nun was to live separately. I saw

the priest [Father Sopocko] who was helping me to prepare the convent and whom I was to 
meet some years later, but whom I already knew from the vision. I saw how he was 
arranging everything in the convent with great care, assisted by another priest [probably 
Father Wantuchowski msi l whom I have not yet met. I saw the iron grating, covered with a 
dark curtain, and the sisters did not go out to the church. 

564 On the feast day of the I mmaculate Conception of the Mother of God, during Holy Mass, I 
heard the rustling of garments and saw the most holy Mother of God in a most beautiful 
radiance. Her white garment was girdled with a blue sash. She said to me, You give Me great 
joy when you adore the Holy Trinity for the graces and privileges which were accorded Me. 
And She immediately disappeared. 

Penances and Mortification. 

565 Interior mortifications take the first place, but besides this, we must practice exterior 
mortifications, strictly determined, so that all can practice them. These are: on three days a 
week, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, there will be a strict fast; each Friday, all the sisters 
- each one in her own cell - will take the discipline r 1191 for the length of the recitation of 
Psalm 50, and all will do this at the same time; namely, three o'clock; and this will be offered 
for dying sinners. During the two great fasts, [1201 ember days r 1211 and vigils, [1221 the food 
will consists of a piece of bread and some water, once a day. 

Let each sister try to observe these mortifications which are prescribed for all. But if anyone 
desires to do something more, she should ask the superior for permission. One more general 
mortification: no sister is allowed to enter the cell of another without special permission from 
the superior, but the superior should sometimes unexpectedly enter the cells of the sisters, 
not in order to spy, but in the spirit of love and the responsibility which she has before God. 
None of the sisters will lock anything; the rule will be the general key for all. 

566 One day, after Holy Communion, I suddenly saw the I nfant J esus standing by my kneeler and 
holding on to it with His two little hands. Although He was but a little Child, my soul was filled 
with awe and fear, for I see in Him my J udge, my Lord, and my Creator, before whose 
holiness the Angels tremble. At the same time, my soul was flooded with such unspeakable 
love that I thought I would die under its influence. I now see that J esus first strengthens my 
soul and makes it capable of abiding with Him, for otherwise I would not be able to bear 
what I experience at such a moment. 

Relationship of Sisters with the Superior. 


567 All the sisters should respect the superior as the Lord Jesus himself, as I mentioned when 
speaking about the vow of obedience. They should behave toward her with childlike trust, 
and should never murmur or find fault with her commands, as this is very displeasing to God. 
Let each be guided by a spirit of faith in her relationship to superiors; let her ask with 
simplicity for all that she needs. God forbid that it ever happen or be repeated that any of the 
sisters would be a cause of sorrow or tears to the superior. Let each one know that as the 
fourth commandment obliges a child to honor its parents, in like manner is the religious 
bound to respect her superior. Only a bad religious would take the liberty of judging her 
superior. Let the sisters be sincere with the superior, telling her about everything and about 
their needs with childlike simplicity. 

The sisters will address the superior thus: "With your leave, Sister Superior." They shall 
never kiss her hand, but whenever they meet her in the corridor or enter her cell, they 
should say, "Praised be Jesus Christ," bowing their heads slightly. 

They shall address each other as "Sister," adding the proper name. Their relationship toward 
the superior should be marked by a spirit of faith and not by sentimentality or flattery, as 
these are unworthy of a religious and would degrade her very much. A religious should be as 
free as a queen, and will be such only when she lives in the spirit of faith. We should obey 
and respect the superior, not because she is good, holy or prudent, but solely because she 
represents God, and by obeying her we are obeying God himself. 

Relationship of the Superior to the Sisters. 

568 The superior should be distinguished by humility and love toward each sister without

exception. She must not let herself be led by likes and dislikes, but by the spirit of Christ 
alone. Let her be aware that God will demand of her an account for each sister. She should 
not moralize to the sisters, but rather set them an example of profound humility and self- 
denial; this will be the most efficacious lesson she can give her subjects. She should be firm, 
but never harsh. She should be patient when bothered with the same questions. Even if she 
has to give the same answer a hundred times over, she should do so with equanimity. Let 
her strive to anticipate the sisters' needs rather than wait till they ask for this or that, for 
people vary in disposition. 

If the superior notices that a sister is sad or is suffering, she should try her very best to help 
and comfort her. She should pray much and ask for light in order to know how to deal with 
each sister, for each soul is a world of its own. God has various ways of communicating with 
souls, ways that are often beyond our comprehension and notice. Therefore the superior 
should be careful not to hinder God's action in a soul. She should never reprimand a sister 
when irritated; rather, reprimands should always be seasoned with encouragement. The 
person is to be helped to recognize and acknowledge her error, but she should not be 
crushed. 

The superior should be outstanding for a love for her sisters which shows itself in actions. 

She should take upon herself all burdens so as to ease the burdens of the sisters. She should 
not demand any services from them, but should respect them as brides of Jesus and be 
always ready to serve them, day and night. Let her ask rather than order. Her heart should 
be open to the sufferings of the sisters, and she herself should look closely at, and learn 
from, the open book; namely, Jesus Crucified. Let her pray fervently for light, especially 
when she has some important dealing with a sister. She should be on her guard lest she 
interfere with the sisters' consciences, for only a priest has this grace. But it may happen 
that a sister may feel the necessity to pour out her soul to the superior, in which case the 



superior may listen to this outpouring, but she is bound to secrecy, as nothing hurts a person 
so much as to have something she has said in confidence or in secret talked about with 
others. Women usually have weak heads in this respect; it is rarely that one finds a woman 
with a man's mind. The superior should strive for deep union with God, and God will govern 
through her. The most holy Mother will be the superioress r 1231 of the convent, and we shall 
be Her faithful daughters. 

569 December 15, 1935. From early morning, today, a strange power has been pushing me to 
action, not giving me a moment's peace. A strange ardor has been lit in my heart, urging me 
to action, and I cannot stop it. This is a secret martyrdom known only to God, but let Him do 
with me as He pleases; my heart is ready for anything. 0 Jesus, my dearest Master, do not 
abandon me, not even for a moment. Jesus, You know well how weak I am of myself; that is 
why I know that it is my weakness that forces You to be with me constantly. 

570 On one occasion, I saw Jesus in a bright garment; this was in the greenhouse. [He said to 
me,] Write what I say to you. My delight is to be united with you. With great desire, 

I wait and long for the time when I shall take up My residence sacramentally in 
your convent. My spirit will rest in that convent and I will bless its neighborhood in 
a special way. Out of love for you all, I will avert any punishments which are rightly 
meted out by My Father's justice. My daughter, I have inclined My heart to your 
requests. Your assignment and duty here on earth is to beg for mercy for the whole 
world. No soul will be justified until it turns with confidence to My mercy, and this 
is why the first Sunday after Easter is to be the Feast of Mercy. On that day, priests 
are to tell everyone about My great and unfathomable mercy. I am making you the 
administrator of My mercy. Tell the confessor that the I mage is to be on view in the 
church and not within the enclosure in that convent. By means of this I mage I shall 
be granting many graces to souls; so let every soul have access to it. 

5710 my Jesus, Eternal Truth, I fear nothing, neither hardships nor sufferings; I fear only one 
thing, and that is to offend You. My J esus, I would rather not exist than make You sad.

Jesus, You know that my love knows no one but You. My soul is absorbed in You. 

572 Oh, how great should be the ardor of every soul who will live in that convent, since God 
desires to come and live with us! Let everyone remember that if we religious do not intercede 
before God, who will? Each of us should burn like a pure sacrifice before the majesty of God, 
but to be pleasing to God, each one should unite herself closely to J esus. It is only with Him, 
in Him and through Him that we can be pleasing to God. 

573 December 21, 1935. One day my confessor [Father Sopocko] told me to go and look at a 
certain house to see whether it was the same house I had seen in my vision. When I went 
with my confessor to see that house, or rather those ruins, at a glance I recognized that they 
were the same as I had seen in my vision. The moment I touched the boards which had been 
nailed together in place of the doors, a strength pervaded my soul like a flash, giving me 
unshakable certitude. I went away quickly from that place, my heart full of joy, for it seemed 
to me that there was a certain force chaining me to that place. 

I am very happy to see that everything agrees perfectly with what I saw in the vision. When 
the confessor spoke to me about the arrangement of the cells and other things, I recognized 
everything to be the same as had been told to me by J esus. I am delighted that God is acting 
in this way through my confessor, but I am not surprised that God is giving him so much 
light; since God, who is Light itself, lives in a pure and humble heart, and all sufferings and 


adversities serve but to reveal the soul's holiness. When I returned home, I went 
immediately to our chapel to rest a while. Then suddenly I heard these words in my soul: Do 

not fear anything. I am with you. These matters are in My hands and I will bring 
them to fruition according to My mercy, for nothing can oppose My will. 

Christmas Eve, 1935. 

574 From early morning, my spirit was immersed in God. His presence pervaded my whole being. 
In the evening, before supper, I went to the chapel for a minute to share the wafer, at the 
feet of J esus, with those who are far away and whom J esus loves greatly and to whom I owe 
so much. Just as I was spiritually sharing the wafer with a certain person [probably Father 
Sopocko], I heard these words within me: His heart is for Me a heaven on earth. When I 
was leaving the chapel, in an instant, God's omnipotence enveloped me. I understood how 
greatly God loves us. Oh, if people could at least partly comprehend and understand this! 

Christmas Day. 

575 Midnight Mass. During Holy Mass, I again saw the little Infant Jesus, extremely beautiful, 
joyfully stretching out His little arms to me. After Holy Communion, I heard the words: I am 

always in your heart; not only when you receive Me in Holy Communion, but 
always. I spent these holydays in great joy. 

576 O Holy Trinity, Eternal God, my spirit is drowned in Your beauty. The ages are as nothing in 
Your sight. You are always the same. Oh, how great is Your majesty. Jesus, why do You 
conceal Your majesty, why have You left Your heavenly throne and dwelt among us? The 
Lord answered me, My daughter, love has brought Me here, and love keeps Me here. 
My daughter, if you knew what great merit and reward is earned by one act of pure 
love for Me, you would die of joy. I am saying this that you may constantly unite 
yourself with Me through love, for this is the goal of the life of your soul. This act is 
an act of the will. Know that a pure soul is humble. When you lower and empty 
yourself before My majesty, I then pursue you with My graces and make use of My 
omnipotence to exalt you. 

577 Once, when my confessor told me to say "Glory be to the Father" as my penance, it took me 
a very long time; and I began many times, but did not finish, because my spirit became 
united with God, and I could not stick to the prayer. Quite frequently, I am unwittingly 
enveloped by God's omnipotence and become entirely plunged in Him through love, and then 
I do not know what is going on around me. When I told my confessor that this short prayer 
often takes very much of my time and that sometimes I cannot even finish it, he told me to 
say it right away, there, at the confessional. However, my spirit became immersed in God 
and, in spite of my efforts, I could not think as I wished. And so the confessor said, "Please

repeat after me." I repeated every word, but while I was pronouncing each word, my spirit 
would be steeped in the Person I was naming. 

578 On one occasion, Jesus told me, concerning a certain priest [probably Father Sopocko], that 
these present years would be the adornment of his priestly life. The days of suffering always 
seem longer, but they too will pass, though they pass so slowly that it seems they are 
moving backwards. However, their end is near, and then will come endless and inconceivable 
joy. Eternity! Who can understand this one word which comes from You, 0 incomprehensible 
God, this one word: eternity! 



579 I know that the graces given me by God are often meant exclusively for certain souls. 
Awareness of this fills me with great joy; I always rejoice at the good of other souls as if it 
were my own. 

580 On a certain occasion, the Lord said to me, I am more deeply wounded by the small 
imperfections of chosen souls than by the sins of those living in the world. It made 
me very sad that chosen souls make Jesus suffer, and Jesus told me, These little 
imperfections are not all. I will reveal to you a secret of My Heart: what I suffer 
from chosen souls. I ngratitude in return for so many graces is My Heart's constant 
food, on the part of [such] a chosen soul. Their love is lukewarm, and My Heart 
cannot bear it; these souls force Me to reject them. Others distrust My goodness 
and have no desire to experience that sweet intimacy in their own hearts, but go in 
search of Me, off in the distance, and do not find Me. This distrust of My goodness 
hurts Me very much. If My death has not convinced you of My love, what will? Often 
a soul wounds Me mortally, and then no one can comfort Me. They use My graces to 
offend Me. There are souls who despise My graces as well as all the proofs of My 
love. They do not wish to hear My call, but proceed into the abyss of hell. The loss 
of these souls plunges Me into deadly sorrow. God though I am, I cannot help such 
a soul because it scorns Me; having a free will, it can spurn Me or love Me. You, who 
are the dispenser of My mercy, tell all the world about My goodness, and thus you 
will comfort My Heart. 

581 I will tell you most when you converse with Me in the depths of your heart. Here, 
no one can disturb My actions. Here, I rest as in a garden enclosed. 

582 The interior of my soul is like a large and magnificent world in which God and I live. Except 
for God, no one is allowed there. At the beginning of this life with God, I was dazzled and 
overcome with awe. His radiance blinded me, and I thought He was not in my heart; and yet 
those were the moments when God was working in my soul. Love was becoming purer and 
stronger, and the Lord brought my will into the closest union with His own holy Will. No one 
will understand what I experience in that splendid palace of my soul where I abide constantly 
with my Beloved. No exterior thing hinders my union with God. Even if I used the most 
forceful words, they would not express even a shadow of how my soul revels in happiness 
and inexplicable love, as great and pure as the spring from which it flows; that is, God 
himself. My spirit is so prevaded with God that I feel it physically, and the body partakes of 
these joys. Although it happens that God's touches vary in the same soul, they come, 
however, from the same source. 

583 On one occasion, I saw Jesus thirsting and fainting, and He said to me, I thirst. When I gave 
Him water, He took it, but did not drink and immediately disappeared. He was clothed as He 
was during His Passion. 

584 When you reflect upon what I tell you in the depths of your heart, you profit more 
than if you had read many books. Oh, if souls would only want to listen to My voice 
when I am speaking in the depths of their hearts, they would reach the peak of 
holiness in a short time. 



585 J anuary 8, 1936. When I went to see the Archbishop [J albrzykowski], I told him that J esus 
was asking that I pray for God's mercy upon the world and that there be a religious 
congregation which would entreat the mercy of God for the world. I asked his permission for 
all the Lord Jesus was demanding of me. The Arch bishop answered me in these words: "As 
for prayer, I give my permission and even encourage you, Sister, to pray as much as 
possible for the world and to beg God's mercy, as mercy is what we all need; and I presume

that your confessor certainly does not forbid you to pray for this intention. But as regards 
this congregation, wait a while, Sister, so that all things may arrange themselves more 
favorably. This thing is good in itself, but there is no need to hurry. If it is God's will, it will 
be done, whether it be a little sooner or a little later. Why shouldn't it be? There are so many 
different kinds of congregations; this one too will come to be if God so wills. Be completely at 
peace. The Lord Jesus can do all things. Strive for a close union with God and do not lose 
heart." These words filled me with great joy. 

586 When I left the Archbishop's house, I heard the following words in my soul: To confirm 
your spirit, I speak through My representatives in accordance with what I demand 
of you, but know that this will not always be so. They will oppose you in many 
things, and through this My grace will be manifest in you, and it will be evident that 
this matter is My doing. But as for you, fear nothing; I am always with you. And 
know this, too. My daughter: all creatures, whether they know it or not, and 
whether they want to or not, always fulfill My will. 

587 Once, I suddenly saw J esus in great majesty, and He spoke these words to me: My 

daughter, if you wish, I will this instant create a new world, more beautiful than 
this one, and you will live there for the rest of your life. I answered, "I don't want any 
worlds. I want You, Jesus. I want to love You, with the same love that You have for me. I 
beg You for only one thing: to make my heart capable of loving you. I am very much 
surprised at Your offer, my J esus; what are those worlds to me? Even if You gave me a 
thousand of them, what are they to me? You know very well, J esus, that my heart is dying of 
longing for You. Everything that is not You is nothing to me." -At that moment, I could no 
longer see anything, but a strange force took over my soul, a strange fire sprang up in my 
heart, and I entered into a kind of agony for Him. Then I heard these words: With no other 
soul do I unite myself as closely and in such a way as I do with you, and this 
because of the deep humility and ardent love which you have for Me. 

588 On one occasion, I heard these words within me: Every movement of your heart is 
known to me. Know, My daughter, that one glance of yours directed at someone 
else would wound Me more than many sins committed by another person. 

589 Love casts out fear. Since I came to love God with my whole being and with all the strength 
of my heart, fear has left me. Even if I were to hear the most terrifying things about God's 
justice, I would not fear Him at all, because I have come to know Him well. God is love, and 
His Spirit is peace. I see now that my deeds which have flowed from love are more perfect 
than those which I have done out of fear. I have placed my trust in God and fear nothing. I 
have given myself over to His holy will; let Him do with me as He wishes, and I will still love 
Him. 


590 When I receive Holy Communion, I entreat and beg the Savior to heal my tongue, that I may 
never fail in love of neighbor. 



591 J esus, You know how ardently I desire to hide so that no one may know me but Your 
sweetest Heart. I want to be a tiny violet, hidden in the grass, unknown in a magnificent 
enclosed garden in which beautiful lilies and roses grow. The beautiful rose and the lovely lily 
can be seen from afar, but in order to see a little violet, one has to bend low; only its scent 
gives it away. Oh, how happy I am to be able to hide myself in this way! O my divine 
Bridegroom, the flower of my heart and the scent of my pure love are for You. My soul has 
drowned itself in You, Eternal God. From the moment when You yourself drew me to 
yourself, 0 my Jesus, the more I have known You, the more ardently I have desired You. 

592 I learned in the Heart of Jesus that in heaven itself there is a heaven to which not all, but 
only chosen souls, have access. Incomprehensible is the happiness in which the soul will be 
immersed. 0 my God, oh, that I could describe this, even in some little degree. Souls are 
penetrated by His divinity and pass from brightness to brightness, an unchanging light, but 
never monotonous, always new though never changing. 0 Holy Trinity, make yourself known 
to souls! 

593 O my J esus, nothing is better for the soul than humiliations. I n contempt is the secret of

happiness, when the soul recognizes that, of itself, it is only wretchedness and nothingness, 
and that whatever it possesses of good is a gift of God. When the soul sees that everything is 
given it freely and that the only thing it has of itself is its own misery, this is what sustains it 
in a continual act of humble prostration before the majesty of God. And God, seeing the soul 
in such a disposition, pursues it with His graces. As the soul continues to immerse itself more 
deeply into the abyss of its nothingness and need, God uses His omnipotence to exalt it. If 
there is a truly happy soul upon earth, it can only be a truly humble soul. At first, one's self- 
love suffers greatly on this account, but after a soul has struggled courageously, God grants 
it much light by which it sees how wretched and full of deception everything is. God alone is 
in its heart. A humble soul does not trust itself, but places all its confidence in God. God 
defends the humble soul and lets Himself into its secrets, and the soul abides in 
unsurpassable happiness which no one can comprehend. 

594 One evening, one of the deceased sisters, who had already visited me a few times, appeared 
to me. The first time I had seen her, she had been in great suffering, and then gradually 
these sufferings had diminished; this time she was radiant with happiness, and she told me 
she was already in heaven. She told me that God had tried our house with tribulation 
because Mother General [Michael] had given in to doubts, not believing what I had said 
about this soul. And further, as a sign that she only now was in heaven, God would bless our 
house. Then she came closer to me, embraced me sincerely and said, "I must go now." I 
understood how closely the three stages of a soul's life are bound together; that is to say, life 
on earth, in purgatory and in heaven [the Communion of Saints]. 



595 I have noticed many times that God tries certain people on account of those things about 
which He spoke to me, for mistrust displeases Jesus. Once, when I saw that God had tried a 
certain Archbishop [J albrzykowski] because he was opposed to the cause and distrustful of it, 
I felt sorry for him and pleaded with God for him, and God relieved his suffering. God is very 
displeased with lack of trust in Him, and this is why some souls lose many graces. Distrust 
hurts His most sweet Heart, which is full of goodness and incomprehensible love for us. A 
priest should sometimes be distrustful in order to better ascertain the genuineness of gifts 
bestowed on a given soul; and when he does so in order to direct the soul to deeper union 
with God, his will be a great and incomprehensible reward indeed. But there is a great 
difference between this and disrespect and distrust of divine graces in a soul simply because 
one cannot comprehend and penetrate these things with one's mind, and this latter is 
displeasing to the Lord. I greatly pity souls who encounter inexperienced priests. 

596 Once, a certain priest [Father Sopocko ri24i l asked me to pray for him. I promised to pray, 
and asked for a mortification. When I received permission for a certain mortification, I felt a 
great desire to give up all the graces that God's goodness would intend for me that day in 
favor of that priest, and I asked the Lord J esus to deign to bestow on me all the sufferings 
and afflictions, both exterior and spiritual, that the priest would have had to suffer during 
that day. God partially answered my request and, at once, all sorts of difficulties and 
adversities sprang up out of nowhere, so much so that one of the sisters remarked out loud 
that the Lord J esus must have a hand in this because everyone was trying Sister Faustina. 
The charges made were so groundless that what some sisters put forward, others denied, 
while I offered all this in silence on behalf of the priest. 

But that was not all; I began to experience interior sufferings. First, I was seized by 
depression and aversion towards the sisters, then a kind of uncertainty began to trouble me. 

I could not recollect myself during prayer, and various things would take hold of my mind. 
When, tired out, I entered the chapel, a strange pain seized my soul, and I began to weep 
softly. Then I heard in my soul a voice, saying, My daughter, why are you weeping? 

After all, you yourself offered to undertake these sufferings. Know that what you

have taken upon yourself for that soul is only a small portion. He is suffering much 
more. And I asked the Lord, "Why are You treating him like that?" The Lord answered me 
that it was for the triple crown meant for him: that of virginity, the priesthood and 
martyrdom. At that moment, a great joy flooded my soul at the sight of the great glory that 
is going to be his in heaven. Right away I said the Te Deum r 1251 for this special grace of 
God; namely, of learning how God treats those He intends to have close to himself. Thus, all 
sufferings are nothing in comparison with what awaits us in heaven. 

597 One day, after our Mass, I suddenly saw my confessor [Father Sopocko] saying Mass in Saint 
Michael's Church, in front of the picture of the Mother of God. It was at the time of the 
Offertory, and I saw the I nfant J esus clinging to him as if fleeing from something and seeking 
refuge in him. But when the time came for Holy Communion, He disappeared as usual. 
Suddenly, I saw the Blessed Mother, who shielded him with Her cloak and said, Courage, My 
son, courage. She said something else which I could not hear. 


598 Oh, how ardently I desire that every soul would praise Your mercy. Happy is the soul that 
calls upon the mercy of the Lord. It will see that the Lord will defend it as His glory, as He 
said. And who would dare fight against God? All you souls, praise the Lord's mercy by 
trusting in His mercy all your life and especially at the hour of your death. And fear nothing, 
dear soul, whoever you are; the greater the sinner, the greater his right to Your mercy, 0 
Lord. 0 incomprehensible goodness! God is the first to stoop to the sinner. 0 J esus, I wish to 
glorify Your mercy on behalf of thousands of souls. I know very well, 0 my J esus, that I am 
to keep telling souls about Your goodness, about Your incomprehensible mercy. 

599 On one occasion, after a person had asked me for prayer, when I met the Lord I said to Him, 
"Jesus, I especially love those souls whom You love." And Jesus answered, And as for Me, I 

bestow special graces on those souls for whom you intercede. 

600 How wondrously J esus defends me; truly this is a great grace of God which I have 
experienced for a long time now. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-521 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-1321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 


Notebook 2 


601 Once, when one of our sisters ri26i became fatally ill and all the community 11221 was gathered 
together, there was also a priest r 1281 there who gave the sister absolution. Suddenly, I saw 
many spirits of darkness. Then, forgetting that I was with the sisters, I seized the holywater 
sprinkler and sprinkled the spirits, and they disappeared at once. However, when the sisters 
came to the refectory, Mother Superior [Borgia] remarked that I should not have sprinkled 
the sick sister in the presence of the priest, as this was his duty. I accepted the admonition 

in the spirit of penance, but holy water is indeed of great help to the dying. 

602 My Jesus, You see how weak I am of myself. Therefore, You yourself direct my affairs. And 
know, Jesus, that without You I will not budge for any cause, but with You I will take on the 
most difficult things. 

603 January 29, 1936. In the evening, when I was in my cell, I suddenly saw a great light and a 
dark gray cross high up within the light. Suddenly, I found myself caught up close to the 
cross. I gazed at it intently, but could not understand anything, and so I prayed, asking what 
it could mean. At that moment I saw the Lord Jesus, and the cross disappeared. The Lord 
Jesus was sitting in a great light, and His legs, up to the knees, were drowned in the light so 
that I could not see them. Jesus bent toward me, looked at me kindly and spoke to me about

the will of the Heavenly Father. He told me that the most perfect and holy soul is the one 
that does the will of the Father, but there are not many such, and that He looks with special 
love upon the soul who lives His will. And J esus told me that I was doing the will of God 
perfectly... and for this reason I am uniting Myself with you and communing with you 
in a special and intimate way. 

God embraces with His incomprehensible love the soul who lives by His will. I understood 
how much God loves us, how simple He is, though incomprehensible, and how easy it is to 
commune with Him, despite His great majesty. With no one do I feel as free and as much at 
ease as with Him. Even a mother and her truly loving child do not understand each other so 
well as God and I do. When I was in that state of communion with God, I saw two particular 
persons, and their sad interior condition was revealed to me. They were in a sorrowful state, 
but I trust that they, too, will glorify the mercy of God. 


604 At the same time, I saw a certain person [Father Sopocko] and, in part, the condition of his 
soul and the ordeals God was sending him. His sufferings were of the mind and in a form so 
acute that I pitied him and said to the Lord, "Why do you treat him like that?" And the Lord 
answered, For the sake of his triple crown. And the Lord also gave me to understand 
what unimaginable glory awaits the person who resembles the suffering J esus here on earth. 
That person will resemble J esus in His glory. The Heavenly Father will recognize and glorify 
our soul to the extent that He sees in us a resemblance to His Son. I understood that this 
assimilation into Jesus is granted to us while we are here on earth. I see pure and innocent 
souls upon whom God has exercised His justice; these souls are the victims who sustain the 
world and who fill up what is lacking in the Passion of Jesus. They are not many in number. I 
rejoice greatly that God has allowed me to know such souls. 

605 0 Holy Trinity, Eternal God, I thank You for allowing me to know the greatness and the 
various degrees of glory to which souls attain. Oh, what a great difference of depth in the 
knowledge of God there is between one degree and another! Oh, if people could only know 
this! O my God, if I were thereby able to attain one more degree, I would gladly suffer all the 
torments of the martyrs put together. Truly, all those torments seem as nothing to me 
compared with the glory that is awaiting us for all eternity. 0 Lord, immerse my soul in the 
ocean of Your divinity and grant me the grace of knowing You; for the better I know You, the 
more I desire You, and the more my love for You grows. I feel in my soul an unfathomable 
abyss which only God can fill. I lose myself in Him as a drop does in the ocean. The Lord has 
inclined himself to my misery like a ray of the sun upon a barren and rocky desert. And yet, 
under the influence of His rays, my soul has become covered with verdure, flowers, and fruit, 
and has become a beautiful garden for His repose. 

606 My J esus, despite Your graces, I see and feel all my misery. I begin my day with battle and 
end it with battle. As soon as I conquer one obstacle, ten more appear to take its place. But I 
am not worried, because I know that this is the time of struggle, not peace. When the burden 
of the battle becomes too much for me, I throw myself like a child into the arms of the 
heavenly Father and trust I will not perish. 0 my Jesus, how prone I am to evil, and this 
forces me to be constantly vigilant. But I do not lose heart. I trust God's grace, which 
abounds in the worst misery. 

607 In the midst of the worst difficulties and adversities, I do not lose inner peace or exterior 
balance, and this discourages my adversaries. Patience in adversity gives power to the soul. 

608 February 2, [1936]. In the morning, when the bell awoke me, I was so overcome by 
drowsiness which I could not shake off that I jumped into cold water, and after two minutes 
the sleepiness left me. When I came to meditation a host of absurd thoughts swarmed into 
my head, so much so that I had to struggle throughout the whole meditation. It was the 
same during prayer time, but when Mass began, a strange silence and joy filled my heart. 

J ust then, I saw Our Lady with the I nfant J esus, and the Holy Old Man [St. J oseph] standing 
behind them. The most holy Mother said to me, Take My Dearest Treasure, and She handed

me the I nfant J esus. When I took the I nfant J esus in my arms, the Mother of God and Saint 
J oseph disappeared. I was left alone with the I nfant J esus. 



609 I said to Him, "I know that You are my Lord and Creator even though You are so tiny." Jesus 
stretched His little arms out to me and looked at me with a smile. My spirit was filled with 
incomparable joy. Then suddenly J esus disappeared, and it was time for Holy Communion. I 
went with the other sisters to the Holy Table, my soul deeply moved. After Holy Communion, 

I heard these words in my soul: I am in your heart, I whom you had in your arms. I 
then pleaded with Jesus for a certain soul [Father Sopocko], asking the Lord to grant him the 
grace to fight, and to take this trial from him. As you ask, so shall it be, but his merit 
will not be lessened. Joy reigned in my soul that God is so good and merciful; God grants 
everything that we ask of Him with trust. 

610 After each conversation with the Lord, my soul is extraordinarily strengthened, and a 
profound tranquility prevails therein and gives me such courage that I do not fear anything in 
the world, but fear only lest I make J esus sad. 

6110 my J esus, I implore You by the goodness of Your most sweet Heart, let Your anger 
diminish and show us Your mercy. May Your wounds be our shield against Your Father's 
justice. I have come to know You, 0 God, as the source of mercy that vivifies and nourishes 
every soul. Oh, how great is the mercy of the Lord; it surpasses all His other qualities! Mercy 
is the greatest attribute of God; everything that surrounds me speaks to me of this. Mercy is 
the life of souls; His compassion is inexhaustible. 0 Lord, look on us and deal with us 
according to Your countless mercies, according to Your great mercy. 

612 One time, I was in doubt as to whether what had happened to me had seriously offended the 
Lord Jesus or not. As I could not solve this doubt, I made up my mind not to go to 
Communion before first going to confession, although I immediately made an act of 
contrition, as it is my habit to ask for forgiveness after the slightest transgression. During 
those days when I did not receive Holy Communion, I did not feel the presence of God. This 
caused me unspeakable pain, but I took it as a punishment for sin. However, at the time of 
Holy Confession I was reproached for not going to Holy Communion, because what had 
happened to me was not an obstacle to receiving Holy Communion. After confession, I 
received Holy Communion, and I saw the Lord J esus who said to me, Know, My daughter, 
that you caused Me more sorrow by not uniting yourself with Me in Holy 
Communion than you did by that small transgression. 

613 One day, I saw a small chapel in which six sisters were receiving Holy Communion from our 
confessor [Father Sopocko], who was wearing a surplice and stole. ri29i There were no 
decorations and no kneelers in the chapel. After Holy Communion, I saw the Lord Jesus as He 
is represented in the image. Jesus was walking away, and I called to Him, "How can You pass 
me by and not say anything to me, Lord? Without You, I shall do nothing; You must stay with 
me and bless me, and this community and my country as well." J esus made the sign of the 
cross and said, Do not fear anything; I am always with you. 

614 On the last two days before Lent we had an hour of propitiatory adoration with the girls. ri3oi 
During both hours I saw the Lord J esus as He was after the scourging. My soul felt such great 
pain that it seemed to me that I was experiencing all those torments in my own body and in 
my own soul. 


615 March 1, 1936. Today during Holy Mass I experienced a strange force and urge to start 
realizing God's wishes. I had such a clear understanding of the things the Lord was asking of 
me that truly if I were to say that I do not understand what God is demanding from me, I 
would be lying, because the Lord is making His will known to me so clearly and distinctly that 
I do not have the least shadow of a doubt about them. I realized that it would be the 
greatest ingratitude to delay any longer this undertaking which the Lord wishes to bring to 
fulfillment for His glory and the benefit of a great number of souls. And He is using me as a 
miserable tool through which to realize His eternal plans of mercy. Truly, how ungrateful my 
soul would be to resist God's will any longer. Nothing will stop me any longer, be it

persecution, sufferings, sneers, threats, entreaties, hunger, cold, flattery, friendships, 
adversities, friends or enemies; be it things I am experiencing now or things that will come in 
the future or even the hatred of hellnothing will deter me from doing the will of God. 

I am not counting on my own strength, but on His omnipotence for, as he gave me the grace 
of knowing His holy will, He will also grant me the grace of fulfilling it. I cannot fail to 
mention how much my own lower nature resists this thing, manifesting its own desires, and 
there results within my soul a great struggle, like that of Jesus in the Garden of Olives. And 
so I too cry out to God, the Eternal Father, "If it is possible, take this cup from me, but, 
nevertheless, not my will, but Yours be done, O Lord; may Your will be done." What I am 
about to go through is no secret to me, but with full knowledge I accept whatever You send 
me, O Lord. I trust in You, 0 merciful God, and I wish to be the first to manifest to You that 
confidence which You demand of souls. O Eternal Truth, help me and enlighten me along the 
roadways of life, and grant that Your will be accomplished in me. 

My God, I desire nothing but the fulfillment of Your will. It does not matter whether it will be 
easy or difficult. I feel an extraordinary force driving me to action. One thing alone holds me 
back, and that is holy obedience. O my Jesus, You urge me on the one hand and hold me 
back and restrain me on the other. I n this, too, 0 my J esus, may Your holy will be done. 

I continued in this state, without a break, for many days. My physical strength declined, and 
though I did not speak to anyone about it, nevertheless Mother Superior [Borgia] noticed my 
pain and remarked that I had changed in appearance and was very pale. She told me to go 
to bed earlier and to sleep longer, and she had a cup of hot milk brought to me in the 
evening. She had a motherly heart, full of care, and tried to help me. But in the case of 
spiritual sufferings, external things have no influence, and they do not bring much relief. It 
was from the confessional that I drew my strength and the consolation of knowing that it 
would not be long before I could begin to act. 

616 On Thursday, when I went to my cell, I saw over me the Sacred Host in great brightness. 
Then I heard a voice that seemed to be coming from above the Host: I n the Host is your 
power; it will defend you. After these words, the vision disappeared, but a strange power 
entered my soul, and a strange light as to what our love for God consists in; namely, in doing 
His will. 

617 O Holy Trinity, Eternal God, I want to shine in the crown of Your mercy as a tiny gem whose 
beauty depends on the ray of Your light and of Your inscrutable mercy. All that is beautiful in 
my soul is Yours, 0 God; of myself, I am ever nothing. 



618 At the beginning of Lent, I asked my confessor for some mortification for this time of fast. I 
was told not to cut down on my food but, while eating, to meditate on how the Lord J esus, 
on the Cross, accepted vinegar and gall. This would be my mortification. I did not know that 
this would be so beneficial to my soul. The benefit is that I am meditating constantly on His 
sorrowful Passion and so, while I am eating, I am not preoccupied with what I am eating, but 
am reflecting on my Lord's death. 

619 At the beginning of Lent, I also asked to have the subject of my particular examen changed, 
and I was told to do everything with the pure intention of reparation for poor sinners. This 
keeps me in continual union with God, and this intention perfects my actions, because 
everything I do is done for immortal souls. All hardships and fatigue are as nothing when I 
think that they reconcile sinful souls with God. 

620 Mary is my Instructress, who is ever teaching me how to live for God. My spirit brightens up 
in Your gentleness and Your humility, O Mary. 

621 On one occasion, when I dropped by the chapel for a five-minute adoration and was praying 
for a certain soul, I came to understand that God does not always accept our petitions for the 
souls we have in mind, but directs these to other souls. Hence, although we do not relieve 
the souls we intended to relieve in their purgatorial suffering, still our prayer is not lost. 

622 Intimate communion of a soul with God. God approaches a soul in a special way known only

to himself and to the soul. No one perceives this mysterious union. Love presides in this 
union, and everything is achieved by love alone. Jesus gives himself to the soul in a gentle 
and sweet manner, and in His depths there is peace. He grants the soul many graces and 
makes it capable of sharing His eternal thoughts. And frequently, He reveals to it His divine 
plans. 

623 Father Andrasz told me that it would be a good thing to have in God's Church a group of 
souls who would beg for His mercy, because in fact we are all in need of that mercy. After 
these words, an extraordinary light filled my soul. Oh, how good is the Lord! 

624 March 18, 1936. Once, I asked the Lord Jesus to take the first step by bringing about some 
change or some external event, or by letting them expel me, as I found it impossible to leave 
the Congregation on my own initiative. And I was in an agony over this for more than three 
hours. I could not pray, but kept submitting my will to the will of God. 

The next morning, Mother Superior [Borgia] told me that Mother General [Michael] was 
transferring me to Warsaw. I answered Mother that perhaps I should not go but leave [the 
Congregation] directly from here. I regarded this to be the external sign for which I had been 
asking God. Mother Superior made no reply, but after some time she called me again and 
said, "You know what, Sister: go anyway and don't worry about wasting a trip, even if you 
should return immediately." I answered, "All right, I will go," although my heart was seized 
with pain because I knew that by this trip this matter would be delayed. However, I try 
always to be obedient, despite everything. 

625 In the evening, when I was praying, the Mother of God told me, Your lives must be like Mine: 
quiet and hidden, in unceasing union with God, pleading for humanity and preparing the 
world for the second coming of God. 



626 In the evening, during Benediction, my soul was for some time in communion with God the 
Father. I felt I was in His hand like a little child, and I heard these words in my soul: Do not 

fear anything. My daughter; all the adversaries will be shattered at My feet. At these 
words, a deep peace and a great interior calm entered my soul. 

627 When I complained to the Lord that He was taking my help away and that I would be alone 
again and would not know what to do, I heard these words: Do not be afraid; I am always 
with you. After these words, a deep peace once again entered my soul. His presence 
penetrated me completely in a way that could be sensed. My spirit was flooded with light, 
and my body participated in this as well. 

628 On the evening of the last day before my departure from Vilnius, an elderly sister r 1311 
revealed the condition of her soul to me. She said that she had already been suffering 
interiorly for several years, that it seemed to her that all her confessions had been bad, and 
that she had doubts as to whether the Lord Jesus had forgiven her. I asked her if she had 
ever told her confessor about this. She answered that she had spoken many times about this 
to her confessors and... "the confessors are always telling me to be at peace, but still I suffer 
very much, and nothing brings me relief, and it constantly seems to me that God has not 
forgiven me." I answered, "You should obey your confessor, Sister, and be fully at peace, 
because this is certainly a temptation." 

But she entreated me with tears in her eyes to ask Jesus if He had forgiven her and whether 
her confessions had been good or not. I answered forcefully, "Ask Him yourself, Sister, if you 
don't believe your confessors!" But she clutched my hand and did not want to let me go until 
I gave her an answer, and she kept asking me to pray for her and to let her know what J esus 
would tell me about her. Crying bitterly, she would not let me go and said to me, "I know 
that the Lord J esus speaks to you, Sister." Since she was clutching my hand and I could not 
wrench myself away, I promised her I would pray for her. In the evening, during Benediction, 
I heard these words in my soul: Tell her that her disbelief wounds My heart more than 
the sins she committed. When I told her this, she began to cry like a child, and great joy 
entered her soul. I understood that God wanted to console this soul through me. Even 
though it cost me a good deal, I fulfilled God's wish.

629 When I entered the chapel for a moment that same evening, to thank God for all the graces 
He had bestowed on me in this house, suddenly God's presence enveloped me. I felt like a 
child in the hands of the best of fathers, and I heard these words: Do not fear anything. I 
am always with you. His love penetrated my whole being. I felt I was entering into such 
close intimacy with Him that I cannot find words to express it. 

630 Then I saw one of the seven spirits near me, radiant as at other times, under a form of light. 

I constantly saw him beside me when I was riding on the train. I saw an angel standing on 
every church we passed, but surrounded by a light which was paler than that of the spirit 
who was accompanying me on the journey, and each of these spirits who were guarding the 
churches bowed his head to the spirit who was near me. 

When I entered the convent gate at Warsaw, the spirit disappeared. I thanked God for His 
goodness, that He gives us angels for companions. Oh, how little people reflect on the fact 
that they always have beside them such a guest, and at the same time a witness to 
everything! Remember, sinners, that you likewise have a witness to all your deeds. 


631 O my Jesus, Your goodness surpasses all understanding, and no one will exhaust Your mercy. 
Damnation is for the soul who wants to be damned; but for the one who desires salvation, 
there is the inexhaustible ocean of the Lord's mercy to draw from. How can a small vessel 
contain the unfathomable ocean? 

632 As I was taking leave of the sisters and was about to depart, one of them r 1321 apologized 
much to me for having helped me so little in my duties, and not only for having neglected to 
help me, but also for having tried to make things more difficult for me. However, in my own 
heart, I regarded her as a great benefactress, because she had exercised me in patience to 
such an extent that one of the elder sisters had once said, "Sister Faustina must be either a 
fool or a saint, for truly, an ordinary person would not tolerate having someone constantly do 
such things out of spite." However, I had always