 
with Your grace, so that I may worthily answer Your call, so that what You yourself have 
intended to accomplish in souls through me, might indeed be accomplished. 

My God, I see the radiance of eternal dawn. My whole soul bounds toward You, O Lord; 
nothing any longer holds me back, nothing ties me to earth. Help me, 0 Lord, to bear the 
rest of my days with patience. The sacrifice of my love burns incessantly before Your 
Majesty, but so silently that only Your divine eye sees it, 0 God, and no other creature is 
capable of perceiving it. 

1366 0 my Lord, although so many things occupy me, although I have this work at heart, 
although I desire the triumph of the Church and the salvation of souls, although all the 
persecutions of Your faithful ones affect me, although the fall of each soul is painful to me, 
yet, above and beyond all this, I still have a profound peace in my soul which neither 
triumphs nor desires nor adversities can disturb because, for me, You are above all 
dispensations, my Lord and my God. 

1367 Eighth day. O my Lord, while calling to mind all Your blessings, in the presence of Your Most 
Sacred Heart, I have felt the need to be particularly grateful for so many graces and 
blessings from God. I want to plunge myself in thanksgiving before the Majesty of God and

to continue in this prayer of thanksgiving for seven days and seven nights; and although I 
will outwardly carry out all my duties, my spirit will nonetheless stand continually before the 
Lord, and all my exercises will be imbued with the spirit of thanksgiving. Each evening, I will 
kneel for a half hour in my cell, alone with the Lord. As often as I shall awake at night, I 
shall steep myself in a prayer of thanksgiving. I n this way I want to repay, at least in some 
small way, for the immensity of God's blessings. 

1368 However, in order to make all this more pleasing in the eyes of God and to remove the least 
shadow of doubt from my mind, I went to my spiritual director [Father Andrasz] and 
revealed these desires of my soul to him; that is to say, the desire to be steeped in such 
thanksgiving. I received permission for everything, except that I should not force myself to 
pray at night should I awaken. 



1369 With what great joy I returned to the convent! And on ; the next day I began this great act 
of thanksgiving by renewing my vows. My soul became thoroughly immersed in God, and 
there issued from my whole being but one single flame of gratitude and thanksgiving to 
God. There were not many words, because God's blessings, like a fierce fire, consumed my 
soul, and all sufferings and sorrows were like wood thrown into the ' flames, without which 
the fire would go out. I called upon all heaven and earth to join me in my act of 1 
thanksgiving. 

1370 The retreat has come to an end, those beautiful days of communing alone with the Lord 

J esus. I made this retreat in the way J esus wanted me to make it, and as He had told me to 
on the first day of the retreat; that is, in the deepest peace, I meditated on God's blessings. 
I have never made a retreat like this before. My soul was more ' profoundly strengthened 
by this peace than it would have been by any tremors or emotions. In the rays of love, I 
saw everything as it really is. 

Coming out of this retreat, I feel thoroughly transformed by God's love. 

1371 0 Lord, deify my actions so that they will merit eternity; although my weakness is great, I 
trust in the power of Your grace, which will sustain me. 

1372 My Jesus, You know that from my earliest years I have wanted to become a great saint; 
that is to say, I have wanted to love You with a love so great that there would be no soul 
who has hitherto loved You so. At first these desires of mine were kept secret, and only 

J esus knew of them. But today I cannot contain them within my heart; I would like to cry 
out to the whole world, "Love God, because He is good and great is His mercy!" 

1373 0 humdrum days, filled with darkness, I look upon you with a solemn and festive eye. How 
great and solemn is the time that gives us the chance to gather merits for eternal heaven! I 
understand how the saints made use of it. 

1374 October 30, 1937. Today, during the religious ceremonies [2171 taking place during Mass, 
and the second day of thanksgiving, I saw the Lord J esus in great beauty, and He said to 

me, My daughter, I have not released you from taking action. I answered, "Lord, my 
hand is too feeble for such work." Yes, I know; but joined with My right hand you will 
accomplish everything. Nevertheless, be obedient, be obedient to the confessors. I 
will give them light on how to direct you. "Lord, I already wanted to begin the work in 
Your Name, but Father S. keeps putting it off." Jesus answered me, I know this; so do 
just what is within your power, but you must never withdraw your efforts. 

1375 November 1, 1937. 

After Vespers today, there was a procession to the cemetery. I could not go, because I was 
on duty at the gate. But that did not stop me at all from praying for the souls. As the 
procession was returning from the cemetery to the chapel, my soul felt the presence of 
many souls. I understood the great justice of God, how each one had to pay off the debt to 
the last cent. 

1376 The Lord gave me an occasion to practice patience through a particular person with whom I 
have to carry out a certain task. She is slower than anyone I have ever seen. One has to 
arm oneself with great patience to listen to her tedious talk. 


1377 November 5. This morning, five unemployed men came to the gate and insisted on being let 
in. When Sister N. had argued with them for quite a while and could not make them go

away, she then came to the chapel to find Mother [Irene], who told me to go. When I was 
still a good way from the gate I could hear them banging loudly. At first, I was overcome 
with doubt and fear, and I did not know whether to open the gate or, like Sister N., to 
answer them through the little window. But suddenly I heard a voice in my soul saying, Go 
and open the gate and talk to them as sweetly as you talk to Me. 

I opened the gate at once and approached the most menacing of them and began to speak 
to them with such sweetness and calm that they did not know what to do with themselves. 
And they too began to speak gently and said, "Well, it's too bad that the convent can't give 
us work." And they went away peacefully. I felt clearly that Jesus, whom I had received in 
Holy Communion just an hour before, had worked in their hearts through me. Oh, how good 
it is to act under God's inspiration! 

1378 I felt worse today, and I went to Mother Superior, intending to ask her for permission to go 
to bed. However, before I could ask for permission, Mother Superior said to me, "Sister, you 
must somehow manage by yourself at the gate, because I am taking the girl to work at the 
cabbage, since there is no one else for the cabbage." I said-good, and left the room. When I 
got to the gate, I felt unusually strong, and I was at my post all day and felt well. I 
experienced the power of holy obedience. 

1379 November 10, [1937]. When Mother [Irene] showed me the booklet with the chaplet, the 
litany and the novena, I asked her to let me look it over. As I was glancing through it, Jesus 
gave me to know interiorly: Already there are many souls who have been drawn to 
My love by this image. My mercy acts in souls through this work. I learned that 
many souls had experienced God's grace. 

1380 I learned that Mother Superior would have quite a heavy cross to bear, together with 
physical suffering, but that it would not last long, r 2 isi 

1381 + It occurred to me to take my medicine, not by the spoonful, but just a little at a time, 
because it was expensive. Instantly, I heard a voice, My daughter, I do not like such 
conduct. Accept with gratitude everything I give you through the superiors, and in this way 
you will please Me more. 

1382 + When Sister Dominic [2191 died at about one o'clock in the night, she came to me and 
gave me to know that she was dead. I prayed fervently for her. In the morning, the sisters 
told me that she was no longer alive, and I replied that I knew, because she had visited me. 
The sister infirmarian [Sister Chrysostom] asked me to help dress her. And then when I was 
alone with her, the Lord gave me to know that she was still suffering in purgatory. I 
redoubled my prayers for her. However, despite the zeal with which I always pray for our 
deceased sisters, I got mixed up as regards the days, and instead of offering three days of 
prayer, as the rule directs us to do, by mistake I offered only two days. On the fourth day, 
she gave me to know that I still owed her prayers, and that she was in need of them. I 
immediately formed the intention of offering the whole day for her, and not just that day 
but much more, as love of neighbor dictated to me. 


1383 Because Sister Dominic, after her death, gave the appearance of looking so well, some 
sisters said that perhaps she was only in a coma, and one of the sisters suggested to me 
that we ought to go and put a mirror to her mouth to see if it would mist, because it would 
if she were alive. I said all right, and we did as we said, but the mirror did not mist, 
although it seemed to us as if it had. Nevertheless, the Lord gave me to know how much 
this had displeased Him, and I was severely admonished never to act again against my 
inner convictions. I humbled myself profoundly before the Lord and asked His pardon. 

1384 I see a certain priest [probably Father Sopocko] whom God loves greatly, but whom Satan 
hates terribly because he is leading many souls to a high degree of sanctity and has regard 
only for God's glory. But I keep asking God that his patience with those who constantly 
oppose him might not run out. Where Satan himself can do no harm, he uses people. 

1385 November 19. After Communion today, Jesus told me how much He desires to come to 
human hearts. I desire to unite Myself with human souls; My great delight is to 
unite Myself with souls. Know, My daughter, that when I come to a human heart in

Holy Communion, My hands are full of all kinds of graces which I want to give to 
the soul. But souls do not even pay any attention to Me; they leave Me to Myself 
and busy themselves with other things. Oh, how sad I am that souls do not 
recognize Love! They treat Me as a dead object. I answered Jesus, "0 Treasure of my 
heart, the only object of my love and entire delight of my soul, I want to adore You in my 
heart as You are adored on the throne of Your eternal glory. My love wants to make up to 
You at least in part for the coldness of so great a number of souls. J esus, behold my heart 
which is for You a dwelling place to which no one else has entry. You alone repose in it as in 
a beautiful garden. 

1386 O my J esus, farewell; I must go already to take up my tasks. But I will prove my love for 
You with sacrifice, neither neglecting nor letting any chance for practicing it slip by." 

When I left the chapel, Mother Superior [Irene] said to me, "You will not go to the 
catechetical lecture, Sister, but will remain on duty." Very well, Jesus; I thus had, 
throughout the day, very many opportunities for sacrifice. I omitted none, owing to the 
strength of spirit I drew from Holy Communion. 

1387 There are times in life when a soul is in such a state that it does not seem to understand 
human speech. Everything tires it, and nothing but ardent prayer will put it at ease. In 
fervent prayer the soul finds relief and, even if it wanted explanations from creatures, these 
would only make it more restless. 

1388 + During one time of prayer, I learned how pleasing to God was the soul of Father Andrasz. 
He is a true child of God. It is rare that divine sonship shines forth so clearly in a soul, and 
this because he has a special devotion to the Mother of God. 

1389 0 my Jesus, although I have such very strong impulsions, I am to act on them slowly, and 
this only in order not to spoil Your work with my haste. 0 my J esus, You give me to know 
Your mysteries, and You want me to transmit them to other souls. Soon now it will be 
possible for me to act. At the moment of apparent absolute destruction, my mission, now 
no longer hindered by anything, will begin. Such is the will of God in this, and it will not 
change; although many persons will oppose it, nothing will change God's will. 



1390 I see Father Sopocko, how his mind is busily occupied and working in God's cause in order 
to present the wishes of God to the officials of the Church. As a result of his efforts, a new 
light will shine in the Church of God for the consolation of souls. Although for the present 
his soul is filled with bitterness, as though that were to be the reward for his efforts in the 
cause of the Lord, this will not however be the case. I see his joy, which nothing will 
diminish. God will grant him some of this joy already here on earth. I have never before 
come upon such great faithfulness to God as distinguishes this soul. 

1391 During supper in the refectory today, I felt God's gaze in the depths of my heart. Such a 
vivid presence pervaded my soul that, for a while, I had no idea where I was. The sweet 
presence of God kept filling my soul and, at times, I could not understand what the sisters 
were saying to me. 

1392 All the good that is in me is due to Holy Communion. I owe everything to it. I feel that this 
holy fire has transformed me completely. Oh, how happy I am to be a dwelling place for 
You, 0 Lord! My heart is a temple in which You dwell continually... 

+ J.M.J. 

1393 J esus, delight of my soul, Bread of Angels, 

My whole being is plunged in You, 

And I live Your divine life as do the elect in heaven, 

And the reality of this life will not cease, though I be laid in the grave. 

J esus- Eucharist, Immortal God, 

Who dwell in my heart without cease, 

When I possess You, death itself can do me no harm. 

Love tells me that I will see You at life's end. 

Permeated by Your divine life, 

I gaze with assurance at the heavens thrown open for me, 

And death will shame-facedly go away, empty-handed, 

For Your divine life is contained within my soul. 

And although by Your holy will, O Lord, 

Death is to touch my body, 

I want this dissolution to come as quickly as possible, 

For through it I am entering eternal life. 

J esus- Eucharist, life of my soul, 

You have raised me up to the eternal spheres, 

And this, by Your agony and death midst terrible tortures. 


26 [November 1937].

1394 Monthly one-day retreat. In the course of this retreat, the Lord has given me the light to 
know His will more profoundly and to abandon myself completely to the holy will of God. 

This light has confirmed me in profound peace, making me understand that I should fear 
nothing except sin. Whatever God sends me, I accept with complete submission to His holy 
will. Wherever He puts me, I will try faithfully to do His holy will, as well as His wishes, to 
the extent of my power to do so, even if the will of God were to be as hard and difficult for 
me as was the will of the Heavenly Father for His Son, as He prayed in the Garden of Olives. 

I have come to see that if the will of the Heavenly Father was fulfilled in this way in His well- 
beloved Son, it will be fulfilled in us in exactly the same way: by suffering, persecution, 
abuse, disgrace. It is through all this that my soul becomes like unto J esus. And the greater 
the sufferings, the more I see that I am becoming like J esus. This is the surest way. If some 
other way were better, Jesus would have shown it to me. Sufferings in no way take away 
my peace. On the other hand, although I enjoy profound peace, that peace does not lessen 
my experience of suffering. Although my face is often bowed to the ground, and my tears 
flow profusely, at the same time my soul is filled with profound peace and happiness... 

1395 I want to hide myself in Your Most Merciful Heart as a dewdrop does in a flower blossom. 
Enclose me in this blossom against the frost of the world. No one can conceive the 
happiness which my heart enjoys in its solitude, alone with God. 

1396 Today I heard a voice in my soul: Oh, if sinners knew My mercy, they would not 
perish in such great numbers. Tell sinful souls not to be afraid to approach Me; 
speak to them of My great mercy. 

1397 The Lord said to me, The loss of each soul plunges Me into mortal sadness. You 
always console Me when you pray for sinners. The prayer most pleasing to Me is 
prayer for the conversion of sinners. Know, My daughter, that this prayer is 
always heard and answered. 

1398 Advent is approaching. I want to prepare my heart for the coming of the Lord J esus by 
silence and recollection of spirit, uniting myself with the Most Holy Mother and faithfully 
imitating Her virtue of silence, by which She found pleasure in the eyes of God Himself. I 
trust that, by Her side, I will persevere in this resolution. 

1399 When I entered the chapel for a moment in the evening, I felt a terrible thorn in my head. 
This lasted for a short time, but the pricking was so painful that in an instant my head 
dropped onto the communion rail. It seemed to me that the thorn had thrust itself into my 
brain. But all this is nothing; it is all for the sake of souls, to obtain God's mercy for them. 

1400 I live from one hour to the next and am not able to get along in any other way. I want to 
make the best possible use of the present moment, faithfully accomplishing everything that 
it gives me. In all things, I depend on God with unwavering trust. 



Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 25 -300 


301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-52] 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1 201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231- 1321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 
Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 

Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 5 


1401 Yesterday I received a letter from Father Sopocko. I learned that God's work is progressing, 
however slowly. I am very happy about this, and I have redoubled my prayers for this 
entire work. I have come to learn that, for the present, so far as my participation in the 
work is concerned, the Lord is asking for prayer and sacrifice. Action on my part could 
indeed thwart God's plans, as Father Sopocko wrote in yesterday's letter. 0 my Jesus, grant 
me the grace to be an obedient instrument in Your hands. I have learned from this letter

how great is the light which God grants to this priest. This confirms me in the conviction 
that God will carry out this work through him despite the mounting obstacles. I know well 
that the greater and the more beautiful the work is, the more terrible will be the storms 
that rage against it. 

1402 God, in his unfathomable decrees, often allows it to be that those who have expended most 
effort in accomplishing some work do not enjoy its fruits here on earth; God reserves all 
their joy for eternity. But for all that, God sometimes lets them know how much their efforts 
please Him. And such moments strengthen them for further struggles and ordeals. These 
are the souls that bear closest resemblance to the Savior who, in the work which He 
founded here on earth, tasted nothing but bitterness. 

1403 O my J esus, may You be blessed for everything! I rejoice that Your most holy will is being 
accomplished. That is quite enough to make me happy. 

1404 Hidden J esus, in You lies all my strength. From my most tender years, the Lord J esus in the 
Blessed Sacrament has attracted me to Himself. Once, when I was seven years old, at a 
Vesper Service, conducted before the Lord Jesus in the monstrance, the love of God was 
imparted to me for the first time and filled my little heart; and the Lord gave me 
understanding of divine things. From that day until this, my love for the hidden God has 
been growing constantly to the point of closest intimacy. All the strength of my soul flows 
from the Blessed Sacrament. I spend all my free moments in conversation with Him. He is 
my Master. 

1405 November 30, 1937. When I was going upstairs this evening, a strange dislike for 
everything having to do with God suddenly came over me. At that, I heard Satan who said 
to me, "Think no more about this work. God is not as merciful as you say He is. Do not pray 
for sinners, because they will be damned all the same, and by this work of mercy you 
expose your own self to damnation. Talk no more about this mercy of God with your 
confessor and especially not with Father Sopocko and Father Andrasz." At this point, the 
voice took the appearance of my Guardian Angel, and at that moment I replied, "I know 
who you are: the father of lies [cf. J n. 8:44]." I made the sign of the cross, and the angel 
vanished with great racket and fury. 



1406 Today, the Lord gave me to know interiorly that He would never abandon me. He gave me 
to know His majesty and His holiness as well as His love and mercy towards me; and He 
gave me a deeper knowledge of my own wretchedness. However, this great misery of mine 
does not deprive me of trust. On the contrary, the better I have come to know my own 
misery, the stronger has become my trust in God's mercy. I have come to understand how 
all this depends on the Lord. I know that no one will touch a single hair of my head without 
His willing it. 

1407 When I was receiving Holy Communion today, I noticed in the cup a Living Host, which the 
priest gave to me. When I returned to my place I asked the Lord, "Why was one Host alive, 
since You are equally alive under each of the species?" The Lord answered me, That is so. 

I am the same under each of the species, but not every soul receives Me with the 
same living faith as you do. My daughter, and therefore I cannot act in their souls 
as I do in yours. 

1408 I was present at Holy Mass celebrated by Father Sopocko. During the Mass, I saw the Infant 
Jesus who, touching the priest's forehead with His finger, said to me, His thought is 
closely united to Mine, so be at peace about what concerns My work. I will not let 
him make a mistake, and you should do nothing without his permission. This filled 
my soul with great peace as regards everything that has to do with this work. 

1409 + Today the Lord J esus is giving me an awareness of Himself and of His most tender love 
and care for me. He is bringing me to understand deeply how everything depends on His 
will, and how He allows certain difficulties precisely for our merit, so that our fidelity might 
be clearly manifest. And through this, I have been given strength for suffering and self- 
denial. 

1410 Today [December 7, 1937] is the eve of the Feast of the I mmaculate Conception of the 
Virgin Mary. During the midday meal, in an instant, God gave me to know the greatness of 
my destiny; that is, His closeness, which for all eternity will not be taken away from me,

and He did this in such a vivid and clear fashion that I remained wrapped up in His living 
presence for a long time, humbling myself before His greatness. + J .M.J . 

1411 O Divine Spirit, Spirit of truth and of light, 

Dwell ever in my soul by Your divine grace. 

May Your breath dissipate the darkness, 

And in this light may good deeds be multiplied. 

O Divine Spirit, Spirit of love and of mercy, 

Who pour the balm of trust into my heart, 

Your grace confirms my soul in good, 

Giving it the invincible power of constancy. 

O Divine Spirit, Spirit of peace and of joy, 

You invigorate my thirsting heart 

And pour into it the living fountain of God's love, 

Making it intrepid for battle. 

O Divine Spirit, my soul's most welcome guest, 

For my part, I want to remain faithful to You; 

Both in days of joy and in the agony of suffering, 



I want always, O Spirit of God, to live in Your presence. 


0 Divine Spirit, who pervade my whole being 
And give me to know Your Divine Threefold Life, 

Initiating me into Your Divine Essence, 

Thus united to You, I will live a life without end. 

1412 + It is with great zeal that I have prepared for the celebration of the Feast of the 
Immaculate Conception of the Mother of God. I have made an extra effort to keep 
recollected in spirit and have meditated on that unique privilege of Our Lady. And thus my 
heart was completely drowned in Her, thanking God for having accorded this great privilege 
to Mary. 

1413 I prepared not only by means of the novena said in common by the whole community, but I 
also made a personal effort to salute Her a thousand times each day, saying a thousand 
"Hail Marys" for nine days in Her praise. 

+ This is now the third time I have said such a novena to the Mother of God; that is, a 
novena made up of a thousand Aves each day. Thus the novena consists in nine thousand 
salutations. Although I have done this now three times in my life, and two of these while in 
the course of my duties, I have never failed in carrying out my tasks with the greatest 
exactitude. I have always said the novena outside the time of my exercises; that is to say, I 
have not said the Aves during Holy Mass or Benediction. Once, I made the novena while 
lying ill in the hospital. Where there's a will, there's a way. Apart from recreation, I have 
only prayed and worked. I have not said a single unnecessary word during these days. 
Although I must admit that such a matter requires a good deal of attention and effort, 
nothing is too much when it comes to honoring the Immaculate Virgin. 

1414 The Feast of the Immaculate Conception. Before Holy Communion I saw the Blessed Mother 
inconceivably beautiful. Smiling at me She said to me, My daughter, at God's command I 
am to be, in a special and exclusive way your Mother; but I desire that you, too, in a special 
way, be My child. 

1415 / desire, My dearly beloved daughter, that you practice the three virtues that are dearest to 
Me-and most pleasing to God. The first is humility, humility, and once again humility; the 
second virtue, purity; the third virtue, love of God. As My daughter, you must especially 
radiate with these virtues. When the conversation ended, She pressed me to Her Heart and 
disappeared. When I regained the use of my senses, my heart became so wonderfully 
attracted to these virtues; and I practice them faithfully. They are as though engraved in 
my heart. 

1416 This has been a great day for me. During this day I remained as though in unceasing 
contemplation; the very thought of this grace drew me into further contemplation; and 
throughout the whole day I continued in thanksgiving which I never stopped, because each 
recollection of this grace caused my soul ever anew to lose itself in God... 

1417 0 my Lord, my soul is the most wretched of all, and yet You stoop to it with such kindness! 

1 see clearly Your greatness and my littleness, and therefore I rejoice that You are so 
powerful and without limit, and so I rejoice greatly at being so little. 



1418 0 suffering Christ, I am going out to meet You. As Your bride, I must resemble You. Your 
cloak of ignominy must cover me too. 0 Christ, You know how ardently I desire to become 
like You. Grant that Your entire Passion may be my lot. May all Your sorrow be poured into 
my heart. I trust that You will complete this in me in the way You deem most fitting.

1419 + Today there was nocturnal adoration. I could not take part in it because of my poor 
health, but before I fell asleep I united myself with the sisters who were at adoration. 
Between four and five o'clock, I was suddenly awakened, and I heard a voice telling me to 
join those who were adoring at that time. I understood that there was among them a soul 
who was praying for me. 

1420 When I steeped myself in prayer, I was transported in spirit to the chapel, where I saw the 
Lord Jesus, exposed in the monstrance. In place of the monstrance, I saw the glorious face 
of the Lord, and He said to me, What you see in reality, these souls see through faith. 
Oh, how pleasing to Me is their great faith! You see, although there appears to be 
no trace of life in Me, in reality it is present in its fullness in each and every Host. 
But for Me to be able to act upon a soul, the soul must have faith. O how pleasing 
to Me is living faith! 

1421 Those taking part in adoration at that time were Mother Superior and a few other sisters. 

But I recognized that it was Mother Superior's prayer which had moved heaven, and I 
rejoiced that there are souls so pleasing to God. 

1422 When, during recreation the next day, I asked which sisters had been at adoration between 
four and five o'clock, one of the sisters cried out, "Why do you ask, Sister? Perhaps you had 
some revelation?" I fell silent and said no more; although I was asked by Mother Superior, I 
could not answer because it was not a suitable moment. 

1423 On a certain occasion, one of the sisters [Sister Damian Ziolek [ 2201 I confided to me that she 
wanted to choose a certain priest as her confessor. Very pleased, she shared the news with 
me and asked me to pray for that intention, and so I promised her to do so. During prayer, 

I learned that that soul would gain no spiritual profit from his direction. And then, the next 
time we met, she told me again of her great joy in being under his direction. 

1424 I joined in her joy, but when she had left I was severely rebuked. J esus told me to tell her 
what He had I given me to know during prayer, which I did at the first opportunity, 
although it cost me a great deal. 

1425 Today, for a short while, I experienced the pain of the crown of thorns. I was praying for a 
certain soul before the Blessed Sacrament at the time. In an instant, I felt such a violent 
pain that my head dropped onto the altar rail. Although this moment was very brief, it was 
very painful. 

1426 Christ, give me souls. Let anything You like happen to me, but give me souls in return. I 
want the salvation of souls. I want souls to know Your mercy. I have nothing left for myself, 
because I have given everything away to souls, with the result that on the day of judgment 

I will stand before You empty-handed, since I have given everything away to souls. Thus 
You will have nothing on which to judge me, and we shall meet on that day: Love and 
mercy... + J . M. J . 


1427 Hidden Jesus, life of my soul, 

Object of my ardent desire, 

Nothing will stifle Your love in my heart. 

The power of our mutual love assures me of that. 

Hidden Jesus, glorious pledge of my resurrection, 

All my life is concentrated in You. 

It is You, 0 Host, who empower me to love forever, 

And I know that You will love me as Your child in return. 

Hidden Jesus, my purest love, 

My life with You has begun already here on earth, 

And it will become fully manifest in the eternity to come, 

Because our mutual love will never change. 

Hidden Jesus, sole desire of my soul, 

You alone are to me more than the delights of heaven. 

My soul searches for You only, who are above all gifts and graces, 

You who come to me under the form of bread. 

Hidden Jesus, take at last to Yourself my thirsting heart 
Which burns for You with the pure fire of the Seraphim. 

I go through life in Your footsteps, invincible, 

With head held high, like a knight, feeble maid though I be. 

1428 For a month now, I have been feeling worse. Every time I cough, I feel my lungs 
disintegrating. It sometimes happens that I feel the complete decay of my own corpse. It is 
hard to express how great a suffering this is. Although I fully agree to this with my will, it is 
nevertheless a great suffering for nature, greater than wearing a hairshirt or a flagellation 
to the point of blood. I have felt it especially when I was going to the refectory. It took

great effort for me to eat anything because food made me sick. I also started at this time to 
suffer from pains in my intestines. All highly seasoned dishes caused me such immense pain 
that I spent many nights writhing in pain and in tears, for the sake of sinners. 

1429 However, I asked my confessor what to do: whether I should continue to suffer this for the 
sake of sinners or ask the superiors for an exception by way of milder food. He decided that 
I should ask the superiors for milder food. And thus I followed his directions, seeing that 
this humiliation was more pleasing to God. 

1430 One day, I began to doubt as to how it was possible to feel this continual decaying of the 
body and at the same time to be able to walk and work. Perhaps this was some kind of an 
illusion. Yet it cannot be an illusion, because it causes me such terrible pains. As I was 
thinking about this, one of the sisters came to converse with me. After a minute or two, she 
made a terribly wry face and said, "Sister, I smell a corpse here, as though it were 
decaying. 0 how dreadful it is!" I said to her, "Do not be frightened, Sister, that smell of a 
corpse comes from me." She was very surprised and said she could not stand it any longer. 
After she had gone, I understood that God had allowed her to sense this so that I would 
have no doubt, but that He was no less than miraculously keeping the knowledge of this 
suffering from the whole community. O my J esus, only You know the full depth of this 
sacrifice. 



1431 Nevertheless, when in the refectory I still had to bear being the object of the frequent 
suspicion that I was being fussy [about my food]. At such times, as always, I hasten to the 
Tabernacle and bow before the ciborium and there draw strength to accept God's will. That 
which I have written is not yet everything. 

1432 Today during confession, breaking the wafer with me spiritually, he gave me the following 
wishes: "Be as faithful as you can to the grace of God; secondly, beg God's mercy for 
yourself and for the whole world, because we are all in great need of God's mercy." 

1433 Two days before Christmas, these words were read in the refectory: "Tomorrow is the Birth 
of J esus Christ according to the flesh. "12211 At these words, my soul was pierced by the light 
and love of God, and I gained deeper knowledge of the Mystery of the I ncarnation of the 
Son of God. How great is the mercy of God contained in the Mystery of the Incarnation of 
the Son of God! 

1434 Today, the Lord gave me knowledge of His anger toward mankind which deserves to have 
its days shortened because of its sins. But I learned that the world's existence is maintained 
by chosen souls; that is, the religious orders. Woe to the world when there will be a lack of 
religious orders! 

+ 

J.M.J. 

1435 I perform each deed in the face of death. 

I do it now as I would want to see it in my last hour. 

Although life, like the wind, will pass swiftly by, 

No deed undertaken for God will perish. 

I feel the complete decay of my organism, 

Although I am still living and working. 

Death will be no tragedy for me, 

Because I have long felt it. 

Although it is very unpleasant for nature 
To constantly smell one's own corpse, 

Yet it is not so terrible when the soul is filled with God's light, 

Because in it faith, hope, love and contrition are awakened. 

Daily I make great efforts 
To take part in community life, 

Thereby gaining graces for souls' salvation, 

Shielding them by my sacrifice from the fire of hell. 

For the salvation of even a single soul 

Is worth the sacrifice of a lifetime 

And the bearing of the greatest sacrifices and torments, 

Seeing how great the glory it gives God. 


1436 + Lord, although You often make known to me the thunders of Your anger, Your anger 
vanishes before lowly souls. Although You are great, Lord, You allow yourself to be 
overcome by a lowly and deeply humble soul. 0 humility, the most precious of virtues, how 
few souls possess you! I see only a semblance of this virtue everywhere, but not the virtue 
itself. Lord, reduce me to nothingness in my own eyes that I may find grace in 1 Yours. 

1437 + Christmas Eve [1937]. After Holy Communion, the Mother of God gave me to experience 
the anxious concern she had in Her heart because of the Son of God. But this anxiety was 
permeated with such fragrance of abandonment to the will of God that I should call it '

rather a delight than an anxiety. I understood how my ' soul ought to accept the will of God 
in all things. It is a pity I cannot write this the way I experienced it. My soul was plunged in 
deep recollection all day long. Nothing could tear me away from this recollection, neither 
duties, nor the business I had with lay people. 

1438 Before supper, I went into the chapel for a moment to break the wafer spiritually with those 
beloved persons, so dear to my heart, though far away. First, I steeped myself in profound 
prayer and asked the Lord for graces for them all as a group and then for each one 
individually. Jesus gave me to know how much this pleased Him, and my soul was filled 
with even greater joy to see that God loves in a special way those whom we love. 

1439 + After I had gone into the refectory, during the reading, my whole being found itself 
plunged in God. Interiorly, I saw God looking at us with great pleasure. I remained alone 
with the Heavenly Father. At that moment, I had a deeper knowledge of the Three Divine 
Persons, whom we shall contemplate for all eternity and, after millions of years, shall 
discover that we have just barely begun our contemplation. Oh, how great is the mercy of 
God, who allows man to participate in such a high degree in His divine happiness! At the 
same time, what great pain pierces my heart [at the thought] that so many souls have 
spurned this happiness. 

1440 When we began to share the wafer, a sincere and mutual love reigned among us. Mother 
Superior [Irene] expressed this wish to me: "Sister, the works of God proceed slowly, so do 
not be in a hurry." In general, the sisters sincerely wished me great love, which is that 
which I desire above all. I saw that these wishes truly came from their hearts, except for 
one sister, who had a concealed malice in her wishes, although this did not cause me much 
pain, for my soul was pervaded by God. Yet this enlightened me as to why God 
communicates so little with a soul of this kind, and I learned that such a soul is always 
seeking itself, even in holy things. Oh, how good the Lord is in not letting me go astray! I 
know that He will guard me, even jealously, but only as long as I remain little, because it is 
with such that the great Lord j likes to commune. As to proud souls, He watches them from 
afar and opposes them. 

1441 Although I wanted to keep vigil for some time before the Midnight Mass, [2221 I could not do 
so. I fell asleep at once, and I was even feeling very weak. But when they rang the bells for 
Midnight Mass, I jumped to my feet at once and dressed, though with great difficulty, 
because I felt sick again and again. 


1442 + When I arrived at Midnight Mass, from the very beginning I steeped myself in deep 
recollection, during which time I saw the stable of Bethlehem filled with great radiance. The 
Blessed Virgin, all lost in the deepest of love, was wrapping Jesus in swaddling clothes, but 
Saint J oseph was still asleep. Only after the Mother of God put J esus in the manger, did the 
light of God awaken Joseph, who also prayed. But after a while, I was left alone with the 
Infant Jesus who stretched out His little hands to me, and I understood that I was to take 
Him in my arms. Jesus pressed His head against my heart and gave me to know, by His 
profound gaze, how good He found it to be next to my heart. At that moment Jesus 
disappeared and the bell was ringing for Holy Communion. 

1443 My soul was languishing with joy. But toward the end of the Mass, I felt so weak that I had 
to leave the chapel and go to my cell, as I felt unable to take part in the community tea. 

But my joy throughout the whole Christmas Season was immense, because my soul was 
unceasingly united with the Lord. I have come to know that every soul would like to have 
divine comforts, but is by no means willing to forsake human comforts, whereas these two 
things cannot be reconciled. 

1444 During this Christmas Season, I have sensed that certain souls have been praying for me. I 
rejoice that such spiritual union and knowledge exist already here on earth. 0 my Jesus, 
praise be to You for all this! 

1445 In the greatest torments of soul I am always alone, but no-not alone, for I am with You, 
Jesus; but here I am speaking about [other] people. None of them understands my heart, 
but this does not surprise me anymore, whereas I used to be surprised when my intentions

were condemned and wrongly interpreted; no, this does not surprise me now at all. People 
do not know how to perceive the soul. They see the body, and they judge according to the 
body. But as distant as heaven is from earth, so distant are God's thoughts from our 
thoughts. I myself have experienced that quite often it happens that [... ] 

1446 The Lord said to me, It should be of no concern to you how anyone else acts; you 
are to be My living reflection, through love and mercy. I answered, "Lord, but they 
often take advantage of my goodness." That makes no difference. My daughter. That is 
no concern of yours. As for you, be always merciful toward other people, and 
especially toward sinners. 

1447 +Oh, how painful it is to Me that souls so seldom unite themselves to Me in Holy 
Communion. I wait for souls, and they are indifferent toward Me. I love them 
tenderly and sincerely, and they distrust Me. I want to lavish My graces on them, 
and they do not want to accept them. They treat Me as a dead object, whereas My 
Heart is full of love and mercy. I n order that you may know at least some of My 
pain, imagine the most tender of mothers who has great love for her children, 
while those children spurn her love. Consider her pain. No one is in a position to 
console her. This is but a feeble image and likeness of My love. 



1448 Write, speak of My mercy. Tell souls where they are to look for solace; that is, in 
the Tribunal of Mercy [the Sacrament of Reconciliation]. There the greatest miracles 
take place [and] are incessantly repeated. To avail oneself of this miracle, it is not 
necessary to go on a great pilgrimage or to carry out some external ceremony; it 
suffices to come with faith to the feet of My representative and to reveal to him 
one's misery, and the miracle of Divine Mercy will be fully demonstrated. Were a 
soul like a decaying corpse so that from a human standpoint, there would be no 
[hope of] restoration and everything would already be lost, it is not so with God. 
The miracle of Divine Mercy restores that soul in full. Oh, how miserable are those 
who do not take advantage of the miracle of God's mercy! You will call out in vain, 
but it will be too late. 

+ J.M.J. 

The Year 1938 
The First of J anuary 

1449 Welcome to you, New Year, in the course of which my perfection will be accomplished. [2231 
Thank You in advance, 0 Lord, for everything Your goodness will send me. Thank You for 
the cup of suffering from which I shall daily drink. Do not diminish its bitterness, 0 Lord, 
but strengthen my lips that, while drinking of this bitterness, they may know how to smile 
for love of You, my Master. I thank You for Your countless comforts and graces that flow 
down upon me each day like the morning dew, silently, imperceptibly, which no curious eye 
may notice, and which are known only to You and me, 0 Lord. For all this, I thank You as of 
today because, at the moment when You hand me the cup, my heart may not be capable of 
giving thanks. 

1450 So today I submit myself completely and with loving consent to Your holy will, 0 Lord, and 
to Your most wise decrees, which are always full of clemency and mercy for me, though at 
times I can neither understand nor fathom them. 0 my Master, I surrender myself 
completely to You, who are the rudder of my soul; steer it Yourself according to Your divine 
wishes. I enclose myself in Your most compassionate Heart, which is a sea of unfathomable 
mercy. 


Notebook 1 : 1-50 t 51-100 t 101-150 t 151-200 t 201-250 t 251-300 

301-350 t 351-400 t 401-450 t 451-500 t 501-521 

Notebook II: 522-600 t 601-650 t 651-700 t 701-750 t 751-800 

801-850 t 851-900 t 901-950 t 951-1000 

Notebook III: 1 001-1050 t 1051-1100 t 1101-1150 t 1151-1200 t 1201-1230 

Notebook IV: 1231-1321 

Notebook V: 1322-1400 t 1401 1450 t 1451-1500 t 1501-1550 t 1551-1589 
Notebook VI: 1590-1650 t 1651-1700 t 1701-1750 t 1751-1803 


Preperation for Holy Communion: 1804-1828 


Diary, St. Maria Faustina Kowalska, Divine Mercy In My Soul 
(c) Congregation of Marians of the Immaculate Conception, Stockbridge, MA 01263. Used with permission. 

To purchase the dairy, visit the Marians of the Immaculate Conception website 


Divine Mercy in My Soul 


Diary - Sr. Faustina 

Notebook 5 


1451 + I am ending the old year with suffering and beginning the new one with suffering as well. 
Two days before the new year, I had to go to bed. I was feeling very bad, and a violent

cough was weakening me. And together with this, a constant pain in my intestines and 
nausea had brought me to the point of exhaustion. Although I could not join in community 
prayer, [2241 I united myself spiritually with the whole community. When the sisters got up 
at eleven o'clock at night to keep vigil and welcome the New Year, I had been writhing in 
agony since nightfall, and this lasted until midnight. I united my sufferings with the prayers 
of the sisters who were keeping vigil in the chapel and atoning to God for the offences of 
sinners. 

1452 When the clock struck twelve, my soul immersed itself more deeply in recollection, and I 
heard a voice in my 

Soul: Do not fear. My little child, you are not alone. Fight bravely, because My arm 
is supporting you; fight for the salvation of souls, exhorting them to trust in My 
mercy, as that is your task in this life and in the life to come. After these words, I 
received a deeper understanding of divine mercy. Only that soul who wants it will be 
damned, for God condemns no one. 

1453 Today is the Feast of the New Year. I felt so bad in the morning that I barely managed to go 
to the next cell to receive Holy Communion. [2251 I could not go to Mass because I felt so 
sick, and I made my thanksgiving in bed too. I wanted so much to go to Mass and then to 
confession to Father Andrasz, but I felt so bad that I could go neither to Mass nor to 
confession. And because of this my soul suffered a good deal. After breakfast, the Sister 
Infirmarian [Sister Chrysostom] came along and asked, "Sister, why didn't you go to Mass?" 
I answered that I couldn't. She shook her head disdainfully and said, "Such a great Feast 
Day, Sister, and you don't even go to Mass!" and she left my cell. I had been in bed for two 
days, writhing in pain, and she hadn't visited me; and when she did come, on the third day, 
she did not even ask if I were able to get up, but asked irritably why I hadn't got up for 
Mass. When I was alone, I tried to get up, but I was seized again with sickness, and so I 
stayed in bed with a calm conscience. Yet my heart had plenty to offer the Lord, joining 
itself spiritually to Him during the second Mass. After the second Mass, Sister Infirmarian 
returned to me, but this time in her capacity as infirmarian, and with a thermometer. But I 
had no fever, although I was seriously ill and unable to rise. So there was another sermon 
to tell me that I should not capitulate to illness. I answered her that I knew that here one 
was regarded as seriously ill only when one was in one's last agony. However, knowing that 
she was about to give me a lecture, I replied that at the present time I was in no need of 
being incited to greater zeal. And once again, I remained alone in my cell. 

My heart was crushed with sorrow, and bitterness flooded my soul, and I repeated these 
words: "Welcome, New Year; welcome, cup of bitterness." My Jesus, my heart is eager for 
You, and yet the gravity of my illness prevents me from participating physically in the 
community prayers, and I am suspected of being lazy. My sufferings are becoming greater. 


After dinner, Mother Superior [Irene] looked in for a moment, but she left very soon. I 
intended to ask to have Father Andrasz come to my cell to hear my confession, but I 
restrained myself from making the request for two reasons: first, not to give occasion for 
murmuring, as had happened above in respect to Holy Mass; and secondly, because I would 
not even be able to make the confession, since I felt I would burst into tears like a little 
child. A while later, one of the sisters came along and again reproved me: "There's some 
milk with butter in the oven, Sister; why don't you drink it?" I answered that there was no 
one to bring it to me. 

1454 + When night fell, the physical sufferings increased and were joined by moral sufferings. 
Night and suffering. The solemn silence of the night made it possible for me to suffer freely. 
My body was stretched on the wood of the cross. I writhed in terrible pain until eleven 
o'clock. I went in spirit to the Tabernacle and uncovered the ciborium, leaning my head on 
the rim of the cup, and all my tears flowed silently toward the Heart of Him who alone 
understands what pain and suffering is. And I experienced the sweetness of this suffering, 
and my soul came to desire this sweet agony, which I would not have exchanged for all the

world's treasures. The Lord gave me strength of spirit and love towards those through 
whom these sufferings came. This then was the first day of the year. 

1455 Also on this day I felt the prayer of a beautiful soul [probably Father Sopocko or Father 
Andrasz] who was praying for me and giving me, in spirit, his priestly blessing. I answered 
in return with my own ardent prayer. 

1456 + 0 most gracious Lord, how merciful it is on Your part to judge each one according to his 
conscience and his discernment, and not according to people's talk. My spirit delights and 
feeds more and more on Your wisdom, which I am getting to know more and more deeply. 
And in this, the vastness of Your mercy becomes more and more manifest to me. 0 my 
Jesus, the effect of all this knowledge on my soul is that I am being transformed into a 
flame of love towards You, my God. 

1457 + January 2, 1938. As I was preparing for HolyCommunion today, Jesus demanded that I 
should write more; not only about the graces which He grants me, but also about external 
matters, and this for the consolation of many souls. 

1458 + After that night of suffering, when the priest [Father Matzanger 226 ] entered my cell with 
the Lord J esus, such fervor filled my whole being that I felt that if the priest had tarried a 
little longer, Jesus himself would have leaped out of his hand and come to me. 

1459 After Holy Communion the Lord said to me, If the priest had not brought Me to you, I 
would have come Myself under the same species. My daughter, your sufferings of 
this night obtained the grace of mercy for an immense number of souls. 

1460 + My daughter, I have something to tell you. I replied, "Speak, Jesus, for I thirst