
such questions?” he thought reproachfully, after such doubts and
surmises. And yet it was impossible not to think about it. He felt
instinctively that this rivalry was of immense importance in his
brothers’ lives and that a great deal depended upon it.

“One reptile will devour the other,” Ivan had pronounced the day
before, speaking in anger of his father and Dmitri. So Ivan looked upon
Dmitri as a reptile, and perhaps had long done so. Was it perhaps since
he had known Katerina Ivanovna? That phrase had, of course, escaped
Ivan unawares yesterday, but that only made it more important. If he
felt like that, what chance was there of peace? Were there not, on the
contrary, new grounds for hatred and hostility in their family? And
with which of them was Alyosha to sympathize? And what was he to wish
for each of them? He loved them both, but what could he desire for each
in the midst of these conflicting interests? He might go quite astray
in this maze, and Alyosha’s heart could not endure uncertainty, because
his love was always of an active character. He was incapable of passive
love. If he loved any one, he set to work at once to help him. And to
do so he must know what he was aiming at; he must know for certain what
was best for each, and having ascertained this it was natural for him
to help them both. But instead of a definite aim, he found nothing but
uncertainty and perplexity on all sides. “It was lacerating,” as was
said just now. But what could he understand even in this “laceration”?
He did not understand the first word in this perplexing maze.

Seeing Alyosha, Katerina Ivanovna said quickly and joyfully to Ivan,
who had already got up to go, “A minute! Stay another minute! I want to
hear the opinion of this person here whom I trust absolutely. Don’t go
away,” she added, addressing Madame Hohlakov. She made Alyosha sit down
beside her, and Madame Hohlakov sat opposite, by Ivan.

“You are all my friends here, all I have in the world, my dear
friends,” she began warmly, in a voice which quivered with genuine
tears of suffering, and Alyosha’s heart warmed to her at once. “You,
Alexey Fyodorovitch, were witness yesterday of that abominable scene,
and saw what I did. You did not see it, Ivan Fyodorovitch, he did. What
he thought of me yesterday I don’t know. I only know one thing, that if
it were repeated to-day, this minute, I should express the same
feelings again as yesterday—the same feelings, the same words, the same
actions. You remember my actions, Alexey Fyodorovitch; you checked me
in one of them” ... (as she said that, she flushed and her eyes shone).
“I must tell you that I can’t get over it. Listen, Alexey Fyodorovitch.
I don’t even know whether I still love _him_. I feel _pity_ for him,
and that is a poor sign of love. If I loved him, if I still loved him,
perhaps I shouldn’t be sorry for him now, but should hate him.”

Her voice quivered, and tears glittered on her eyelashes. Alyosha
shuddered inwardly. “That girl is truthful and sincere,” he thought,
“and she does not love Dmitri any more.”

“That’s true, that’s true,” cried Madame Hohlakov.

“Wait, dear. I haven’t told you the chief, the final decision I came to
during the night. I feel that perhaps my decision is a terrible one—for
me, but I foresee that nothing will induce me to change it—nothing. It
will be so all my life. My dear, kind, ever-faithful and generous
adviser, the one friend I have in the world, Ivan Fyodorovitch, with
his deep insight into the heart, approves and commends my decision. He
knows it.”

“Yes, I approve of it,” Ivan assented, in a subdued but firm voice.

“But I should like Alyosha, too (Ah! Alexey Fyodorovitch, forgive my
calling you simply Alyosha), I should like Alexey Fyodorovitch, too, to
tell me before my two friends whether I am right. I feel instinctively
that you, Alyosha, my dear brother (for you are a dear brother to me),”
she said again ecstatically, taking his cold hand in her hot one, “I
foresee that your decision, your approval, will bring me peace, in
spite of all my sufferings, for, after your words, I shall be calm and
submit—I feel that.”

“I don’t know what you are asking me,” said Alyosha, flushing. “I only
know that I love you and at this moment wish for your happiness more
than my own!... But I know nothing about such affairs,” something
impelled him to add hurriedly.

“In such affairs, Alexey Fyodorovitch, in such affairs, the chief thing
is honor and duty and something higher—I don’t know what—but higher
perhaps even than duty. I am conscious of this irresistible feeling in
my heart, and it compels me irresistibly. But it may all be put in two
words. I’ve already decided, even if he marries that—creature,” she
began solemnly, “whom I never, never can forgive, _even then I will not
abandon him_. Henceforward I will never, never abandon him!” she cried,
breaking into a sort of pale, hysterical ecstasy. “Not that I would run
after him continually, get in his way and worry him. Oh, no! I will go
away to another town—where you like—but I will watch over him all my
life—I will watch over him all my life unceasingly. When he becomes
unhappy with that woman, and that is bound to happen quite soon, let
him come to me and he will find a friend, a sister.... Only a sister,
of course, and so for ever; but he will learn at least that that sister
is really his sister, who loves him and has sacrificed all her life to
him. I will gain my point. I will insist on his knowing me and
confiding entirely in me, without reserve,” she cried, in a sort of
frenzy. “I will be a god to whom he can pray—and that, at least, he
owes me for his treachery and for what I suffered yesterday through
him. And let him see that all my life I will be true to him and the
promise I gave him, in spite of his being untrue and betraying me. I
will—I will become nothing but a means for his happiness, or—how shall
I say?—an instrument, a machine for his happiness, and that for my
whole life, my whole life, and that he may see that all his life!
That’s my decision. Ivan Fyodorovitch fully approves me.”

She was breathless. She had perhaps intended to express her idea with
more dignity, art and naturalness, but her speech was too hurried and
crude. It was full of youthful impulsiveness, it betrayed that she was
still smarting from yesterday’s insult, and that her pride craved
satisfaction. She felt this herself. Her face suddenly darkened, an
unpleasant look came into her eyes. Alyosha at once saw it and felt a
pang of sympathy. His brother Ivan made it worse by adding:

“I’ve only expressed my own view,” he said. “From any one else, this
would have been affected and overstrained, but from you—no. Any other
woman would have been wrong, but you are right. I don’t know how to
explain it, but I see that you are absolutely genuine and, therefore,
you are right.”

“But that’s only for the moment. And what does this moment stand for?
Nothing but yesterday’s insult.” Madame Hohlakov obviously had not
intended to interfere, but she could not refrain from this very just
comment.

“Quite so, quite so,” cried Ivan, with peculiar eagerness, obviously
annoyed at being interrupted, “in any one else this moment would be
only due to yesterday’s impression and would be only a moment. But with
Katerina Ivanovna’s character, that moment will last all her life. What
for any one else would be only a promise is for her an everlasting
burdensome, grim perhaps, but unflagging duty. And she will be
sustained by the feeling of this duty being fulfilled. Your life,
Katerina Ivanovna, will henceforth be spent in painful brooding over
your own feelings, your own heroism, and your own suffering; but in the
end that suffering will be softened and will pass into sweet
contemplation of the fulfillment of a bold and proud design. Yes, proud
it certainly is, and desperate in any case, but a triumph for you. And
the consciousness of it will at last be a source of complete
satisfaction and will make you resigned to everything else.”

This was unmistakably said with some malice and obviously with
intention; even perhaps with no desire to conceal that he spoke
ironically and with intention.

“Oh, dear, how mistaken it all is!” Madame Hohlakov cried again.

“Alexey Fyodorovitch, you speak. I want dreadfully to know what you
will say!” cried Katerina Ivanovna, and burst into tears. Alyosha got
up from the sofa.

“It’s nothing, nothing!” she went on through her tears. “I’m upset, I
didn’t sleep last night. But by the side of two such friends as you and
your brother I still feel strong—for I know—you two will never desert
me.”

“Unluckily I am obliged to return to Moscow—perhaps to-morrow—and to
leave you for a long time—And, unluckily, it’s unavoidable,” Ivan said
suddenly.

“To-morrow—to Moscow!” her face was suddenly contorted; “but—but, dear
me, how fortunate!” she cried in a voice suddenly changed. In one
instant there was no trace left of her tears. She underwent an
instantaneous transformation, which amazed Alyosha. Instead of a poor,
insulted girl, weeping in a sort of “laceration,” he saw a woman
completely self-possessed and even exceedingly pleased, as though
something agreeable had just happened.

“Oh, not fortunate that I am losing you, of course not,” she corrected
herself suddenly, with a charming society smile. “Such a friend as you
are could not suppose that. I am only too unhappy at losing you.” She
rushed impulsively at Ivan, and seizing both his hands, pressed them
warmly. “But what is fortunate is that you will be able in Moscow to
see auntie and Agafya and to tell them all the horror of my present
position. You can speak with complete openness to Agafya, but spare
dear auntie. You will know how to do that. You can’t think how wretched
I was yesterday and this morning, wondering how I could write them that
dreadful letter—for one can never tell such things in a letter.... Now
it will be easy for me to write, for you will see them and explain
everything. Oh, how glad I am! But I am only glad of that, believe me.
Of course, no one can take your place.... I will run at once to write
the letter,” she finished suddenly, and took a step as though to go out
of the room.

“And what about Alyosha and his opinion, which you were so desperately
anxious to hear?” cried Madame Hohlakov. There was a sarcastic, angry
note in her voice.

“I had not forgotten that,” cried Katerina Ivanovna, coming to a sudden
standstill, “and why are you so antagonistic at such a moment?” she
added, with warm and bitter reproachfulness. “What I said, I repeat. I
must have his opinion. More than that, I must have his decision! As he
says, so it shall be. You see how anxious I am for your words, Alexey
Fyodorovitch.... But what’s the matter?”

“I couldn’t have believed it. I can’t understand it!” Alyosha cried
suddenly in distress.

“What? What?”

“He is going to Moscow, and you cry out that you are glad. You said
that on purpose! And you begin explaining that you are not glad of that
but sorry to be—losing a friend. But that was acting, too—you were
playing a part—as in a theater!”

“In a theater? What? What do you mean?” exclaimed Katerina Ivanovna,
profoundly astonished, flushing crimson, and frowning.

“Though you assure him you are sorry to lose a friend in him, you
persist in telling him to his face that it’s fortunate he is going,”
said Alyosha breathlessly. He was standing at the table and did not sit
down.

“What are you talking about? I don’t understand.”

“I don’t understand myself.... I seemed to see in a flash ... I know I
am not saying it properly, but I’ll say it all the same,” Alyosha went
on in the same shaking and broken voice. “What I see is that perhaps
you don’t love Dmitri at all ... and never have, from the beginning....
And Dmitri, too, has never loved you ... and only esteems you.... I
really don’t know how I dare to say all this, but somebody must tell
the truth ... for nobody here will tell the truth.”

“What truth?” cried Katerina Ivanovna, and there was an hysterical ring
in her voice.

“I’ll tell you,” Alyosha went on with desperate haste, as though he
were jumping from the top of a house. “Call Dmitri; I will fetch
him—and let him come here and take your hand and take Ivan’s and join
your hands. For you’re torturing Ivan, simply because you love him—and
torturing him, because you love Dmitri through ‘self-laceration’—with
an unreal love—because you’ve persuaded yourself.”

Alyosha broke off and was silent.

“You ... you ... you are a little religious idiot—that’s what you are!”
Katerina Ivanovna snapped. Her face was white and her lips were moving
with anger.

Ivan suddenly laughed and got up. His hat was in his hand.

“You are mistaken, my good Alyosha,” he said, with an expression
Alyosha had never seen in his face before—an expression of youthful
sincerity and strong, irresistibly frank feeling. “Katerina Ivanovna
has never cared for me! She has known all the time that I cared for
her—though I never said a word of my love to her—she knew, but she
didn’t care for me. I have never been her friend either, not for one
moment; she is too proud to need my friendship. She kept me at her side
as a means of revenge. She revenged with me and on me all the insults
which she has been continually receiving from Dmitri ever since their
first meeting. For even that first meeting has rankled in her heart as
an insult—that’s what her heart is like! She has talked to me of
nothing but her love for him. I am going now; but, believe me, Katerina
Ivanovna, you really love him. And the more he insults you, the more
you love him—that’s your ‘laceration.’ You love him just as he is; you
love him for insulting you. If he reformed, you’d give him up at once
and cease to love him. But you need him so as to contemplate
continually your heroic fidelity and to reproach him for infidelity.
And it all comes from your pride. Oh, there’s a great deal of
humiliation and self-abasement about it, but it all comes from
pride.... I am too young and I’ve loved you too much. I know that I
ought not to say this, that it would be more dignified on my part
simply to leave you, and it would be less offensive for you. But I am
going far away, and shall never come back.... It is for ever. I don’t
want to sit beside a ‘laceration.’... But I don’t know how to speak
now. I’ve said everything.... Good-by, Katerina Ivanovna; you can’t be
angry with me, for I am a hundred times more severely punished than
you, if only by the fact that I shall never see you again. Good-by! I
don’t want your hand. You have tortured me too deliberately for me to
be able to forgive you at this moment. I shall forgive you later, but
now I don’t want your hand. ‘Den Dank, Dame, begehr ich nicht,’” he
added, with a forced smile, showing, however, that he could read
Schiller, and read him till he knew him by heart—which Alyosha would
never have believed. He went out of the room without saying good-by
even to his hostess, Madame Hohlakov. Alyosha clasped his hands.

“Ivan!” he cried desperately after him. “Come back, Ivan! No, nothing
will induce him to come back now!” he cried again, regretfully
realizing it; “but it’s my fault, my fault. I began it! Ivan spoke
angrily, wrongly. Unjustly and angrily. He must come back here, come
back,” Alyosha kept exclaiming frantically.

Katerina Ivanovna went suddenly into the next room.

“You have done no harm. You behaved beautifully, like an angel,” Madame
Hohlakov whispered rapidly and ecstatically to Alyosha. “I will do my
utmost to prevent Ivan Fyodorovitch from going.”

Her face beamed with delight, to the great distress of Alyosha, but
Katerina Ivanovna suddenly returned. She had two hundred-rouble notes
in her hand.

“I have a great favor to ask of you, Alexey Fyodorovitch,” she began,
addressing Alyosha with an apparently calm and even voice, as though
nothing had happened. “A week—yes, I think it was a week ago—Dmitri
Fyodorovitch was guilty of a hasty and unjust action—a very ugly
action. There is a low tavern here, and in it he met that discharged
officer, that captain, whom your father used to employ in some
business. Dmitri Fyodorovitch somehow lost his temper with this
captain, seized him by the beard and dragged him out into the street
and for some distance along it, in that insulting fashion. And I am
told that his son, a boy, quite a child, who is at the school here, saw
it and ran beside them crying and begging for his father, appealing to
every one to defend him, while every one laughed. You must forgive me,
Alexey Fyodorovitch, I cannot think without indignation of that
disgraceful action of _his_ ... one of those actions of which only
Dmitri Fyodorovitch would be capable in his anger ... and in his
passions! I can’t describe it even.... I can’t find my words.