 her to send
me to Petersburg as other parents did. “You have only one son now,”
they said, “and have a fair income, and you will be depriving him
perhaps of a brilliant career if you keep him here.” They suggested I
should be sent to Petersburg to the Cadet Corps, that I might
afterwards enter the Imperial Guard. My mother hesitated for a long
time, it was awful to part with her only child, but she made up her
mind to it at last, though not without many tears, believing she was
acting for my happiness. She brought me to Petersburg and put me into
the Cadet Corps, and I never saw her again. For she too died three
years afterwards. She spent those three years mourning and grieving for
both of us.

From the house of my childhood I have brought nothing but precious
memories, for there are no memories more precious than those of early
childhood in one’s first home. And that is almost always so if there is
any love and harmony in the family at all. Indeed, precious memories
may remain even of a bad home, if only the heart knows how to find what
is precious. With my memories of home I count, too, my memories of the
Bible, which, child as I was, I was very eager to read at home. I had a
book of Scripture history then with excellent pictures, called _A
Hundred and Four Stories from the Old and New Testament_, and I learned
to read from it. I have it lying on my shelf now, I keep it as a
precious relic of the past. But even before I learned to read, I
remember first being moved to devotional feeling at eight years old. My
mother took me alone to mass (I don’t remember where my brother was at
the time) on the Monday before Easter. It was a fine day, and I
remember to-day, as though I saw it now, how the incense rose from the
censer and softly floated upwards and, overhead in the cupola, mingled
in rising waves with the sunlight that streamed in at the little
window. I was stirred by the sight, and for the first time in my life I
consciously received the seed of God’s word in my heart. A youth came
out into the middle of the church carrying a big book, so large that at
the time I fancied he could scarcely carry it. He laid it on the
reading desk, opened it, and began reading, and suddenly for the first
time I understood something read in the church of God. In the land of
Uz, there lived a man, righteous and God-fearing, and he had great
wealth, so many camels, so many sheep and asses, and his children
feasted, and he loved them very much and prayed for them. “It may be
that my sons have sinned in their feasting.” Now the devil came before
the Lord together with the sons of God, and said to the Lord that he
had gone up and down the earth and under the earth. “And hast thou
considered my servant Job?” God asked of him. And God boasted to the
devil, pointing to his great and holy servant. And the devil laughed at
God’s words. “Give him over to me and Thou wilt see that Thy servant
will murmur against Thee and curse Thy name.” And God gave up the just
man He loved so, to the devil. And the devil smote his children and his
cattle and scattered his wealth, all of a sudden like a thunderbolt
from heaven. And Job rent his mantle and fell down upon the ground and
cried aloud, “Naked came I out of my mother’s womb, and naked shall I
return into the earth; the Lord gave and the Lord has taken away.
Blessed be the name of the Lord for ever and ever.”

Fathers and teachers, forgive my tears now, for all my childhood rises
up again before me, and I breathe now as I breathed then, with the
breast of a little child of eight, and I feel as I did then, awe and
wonder and gladness. The camels at that time caught my imagination, and
Satan, who talked like that with God, and God who gave His servant up
to destruction, and His servant crying out: “Blessed be Thy name
although Thou dost punish me,” and then the soft and sweet singing in
the church: “Let my prayer rise up before Thee,” and again incense from
the priest’s censer and the kneeling and the prayer. Ever since
then—only yesterday I took it up—I’ve never been able to read that
sacred tale without tears. And how much that is great, mysterious and
unfathomable there is in it! Afterwards I heard the words of mockery
and blame, proud words, “How could God give up the most loved of His
saints for the diversion of the devil, take from him his children,
smite him with sore boils so that he cleansed the corruption from his
sores with a pot-sherd—and for no object except to boast to the devil!
‘See what My saint can suffer for My sake.’” But the greatness of it
lies just in the fact that it is a mystery—that the passing earthly
show and the eternal verity are brought together in it. In the face of
the earthly truth, the eternal truth is accomplished. The Creator, just
as on the first days of creation He ended each day with praise: “That
is good that I have created,” looks upon Job and again praises His
creation. And Job, praising the Lord, serves not only Him but all His
creation for generations and generations, and for ever and ever, since
for that he was ordained. Good heavens, what a book it is, and what
lessons there are in it! What a book the Bible is, what a miracle, what
strength is given with it to man! It is like a mold cast of the world
and man and human nature, everything is there, and a law for everything
for all the ages. And what mysteries are solved and revealed! God
raises Job again, gives him wealth again. Many years pass by, and he
has other children and loves them. But how could he love those new ones
when those first children are no more, when he has lost them?
Remembering them, how could he be fully happy with those new ones,
however dear the new ones might be? But he could, he could. It’s the
great mystery of human life that old grief passes gradually into quiet,
tender joy. The mild serenity of age takes the place of the riotous
blood of youth. I bless the rising sun each day, and, as before, my
hearts sings to meet it, but now I love even more its setting, its long
slanting rays and the soft, tender, gentle memories that come with
them, the dear images from the whole of my long, happy life—and over
all the Divine Truth, softening, reconciling, forgiving! My life is
ending, I know that well, but every day that is left me I feel how my
earthly life is in touch with a new infinite, unknown, that approaching
life, the nearness of which sets my soul quivering with rapture, my
mind glowing and my heart weeping with joy.

Friends and teachers, I have heard more than once, and of late one may
hear it more often, that the priests, and above all the village
priests, are complaining on all sides of their miserable income and
their humiliating lot. They plainly state, even in print—I’ve read it
myself—that they are unable to teach the Scriptures to the people
because of the smallness of their means, and if Lutherans and heretics
come and lead the flock astray, they let them lead them astray because
they have so little to live upon. May the Lord increase the sustenance
that is so precious to them, for their complaint is just, too. But of a
truth I say, if any one is to blame in the matter, half the fault is
ours. For he may be short of time, he may say truly that he is
overwhelmed all the while with work and services, but still it’s not
all the time, even he has an hour a week to remember God. And he does
not work the whole year round. Let him gather round him once a week,
some hour in the evening, if only the children at first—the fathers
will hear of it and they too will begin to come. There’s no need to
build halls for this, let him take them into his own cottage. They
won’t spoil his cottage, they would only be there one hour. Let him
open that book and begin reading it without grand words or
superciliousness, without condescension to them, but gently and kindly,
being glad that he is reading to them and that they are listening with
attention, loving the words himself, only stopping from time to time to
explain words that are not understood by the peasants. Don’t be
anxious, they will understand everything, the orthodox heart will
understand all! Let him read them about Abraham and Sarah, about Isaac
and Rebecca, of how Jacob went to Laban and wrestled with the Lord in
his dream and said, “This place is holy”—and he will impress the devout
mind of the peasant. Let him read, especially to the children, how the
brothers sold Joseph, the tender boy, the dreamer and prophet, into
bondage, and told their father that a wild beast had devoured him, and
showed him his blood-stained clothes. Let him read them how the
brothers afterwards journeyed into Egypt for corn, and Joseph, already
a great ruler, unrecognized by them, tormented them, accused them, kept
his brother Benjamin, and all through love: “I love you, and loving you
I torment you.” For he remembered all his life how they had sold him to
the merchants in the burning desert by the well, and how, wringing his
hands, he had wept and besought his brothers not to sell him as a slave
in a strange land. And how, seeing them again after many years, he
loved them beyond measure, but he harassed and tormented them in love.
He left them at last not able to bear the suffering of his heart, flung
himself on his bed and wept. Then, wiping his tears away, he went out
to them joyful and told them, “Brothers, I am your brother Joseph!” Let
him read them further how happy old Jacob was on learning that his
darling boy was still alive, and how he went to Egypt leaving his own
country, and died in a foreign land, bequeathing his great prophecy
that had lain mysteriously hidden in his meek and timid heart all his
life, that from his offspring, from Judah, will come the great hope of
the world, the Messiah and Saviour.

Fathers and teachers, forgive me and don’t be angry, that like a little
child I’ve been babbling of what you know long ago, and can teach me a
hundred times more skillfully. I only speak from rapture, and forgive
my tears, for I love the Bible. Let him too weep, the priest of God,
and be sure that the hearts of his listeners will throb in response.
Only a little tiny seed is needed—drop it into the heart of the peasant
and it won’t die, it will live in his soul all his life, it will be
hidden in the midst of his darkness and sin, like a bright spot, like a
great reminder. And there’s no need of much teaching or explanation, he
will understand it all simply. Do you suppose that the peasants don’t
understand? Try reading them the touching story of the fair Esther and
the haughty Vashti; or the miraculous story of Jonah in the whale.
Don’t forget either the parables of Our Lord, choose especially from
the Gospel of St. Luke (that is what I did), and then from the Acts of
the Apostles the conversion of St. Paul (that you mustn’t leave out on
any account), and from the _Lives of the Saints_, for instance, the
life of Alexey, the man of God and, greatest of all, the happy martyr
and the seer of God, Mary of Egypt—and you will penetrate their hearts
with these simple tales. Give one hour a week to it in spite of your
poverty, only one little hour. And you will see for yourselves that our
people is gracious and grateful, and will repay you a hundred-fold.
Mindful of the kindness of their priest and the moving words they have
heard from him, they will of their own accord help him in his fields
and in his house, and will treat him with more respect than before—so
that it will even increase his worldly well-being too. The thing is so
simple that sometimes one is even afraid to put it into words, for fear
of being laughed at, and yet how true it is! One who does not believe
in God will not believe in God’s people. He who believes in God’s
people will see His Holiness too, even though he had not believed in it
till then. Only the people and their future spiritual power will
convert our atheists, who have torn themselves away from their native
soil.

And what is the use of Christ’s words, unless we set an example? The
people is lost without the Word of God, for its soul is athirst for the
Word and for all that is good.

In my youth, long ago, nearly forty years ago, I traveled all over
Russia with Father Anfim, collecting funds for our monastery, and we
stayed one night on the bank of a great navigable river with some
fishermen. A good-looking peasant lad, about eighteen, joined us; he
had to hurry back next morning to pull a merchant’s barge along the
bank. I noticed him looking straight before him with clear and tender
eyes. It was a bright, warm, still, July night, a cool mist rose from
the broad river, we could hear the plash of a fish, the birds were
still, all was hushed and beautiful, everything praying to God. Only we
two were not sleeping, the lad and I, and we talked of the beauty of
this world of God’s and of the great mystery of it. Every blade of
grass, every insect, ant, and golden bee, all so marvelously know their
path, though they have not intelligence, they bear witness to the
mystery of God and continually accomplish it themselves. I saw the dear
lad’s heart was moved. He told me that he loved the forest and the
forest birds. He was a bird-catcher, knew the note of each of them,
could call each bird. “I know nothing better than to be in the forest,”
said he, “though all things are good.”

“Truly,” I answered him, “all things are good and fair, because all is
truth. Look,” said I, “at the horse, that great beast that is so near
to man; or the lowly, pensive ox, which feeds him and works for him;
look at their faces, what meekness, what devotion to man, who often
beats them mercilessly. What gentleness, what confidence and what
beauty! It’s touching to know that there’s no sin in them, for all, all
except man, is sinless, and Christ has been with them before us.”

“Why,” asked the boy, “is Christ with them too?”

“It cannot but be so,” said I, “since the Word is for all. All creation
and all creatures, every leaf is striving to the Word, singing glory to
God, weeping to Christ, unconsciously accomplishing this by the mystery
of their sinless life. Yonder,” said I, “in the forest wanders the
dreadful bear, fierce and menacing, and yet innocent in it.” And I told
him how once a bear came to a great saint who had taken refuge in a
tiny cell in the wood. And the great saint pitied him, went up to him
without fear and gave him a piece of bread. “Go along,” said he,
“Christ be with you,” and the savage beast walked away meekly and
obediently, doing no harm. And the lad was delighted that the bear had
walked away without hurting the saint, and that Christ was with him
too. “Ah,” said he, “how good that is, how good and beautiful is all
God’s work!” He sat musing softly and sweetly. I saw he understood. And
he slept beside me a light and sinless sleep. May God bless youth! And
I prayed for him as I went to sleep. Lord, send peace and light to Thy
people!




Chapter II.
The Duel


_(c) Recollections of Father Zossima’s Youth before he became a Monk.
The Duel_

I spent a long time, almost eight years, in the military cadet school
at Petersburg, and in the novelty of my surroundings there, many of my
childish impressions grew dimmer, though I forgot nothing. I picked up
so many new habits and opinions that I was transformed into a cruel,
absurd, almost savage creature. A surface polish of courtesy and
society manners I did acquire together with the French language.

But we all, myself included, looked upon the soldiers in our service as
cattle. I was perhaps worse than the rest in that respect, for I was so
much more impressionable than my companions. By the time we left the
school as officers, we were ready to lay down our lives for the honor
of the regiment, but no one of us had any knowledge of the real meaning
of honor, and if any one had known it, he would have been the first to
ridicule it. Drunkenness, debauchery and devilry were what we almost
prided ourselves on. I don’t say that we