 I let him know the signals
as a great secret.”

“What signals? Whom did you tell? Confound you, speak more plainly.”

“I’m bound to admit the fact,” Smerdyakov drawled with pedantic
composure, “that I have a secret with Fyodor Pavlovitch in this
business. As you know yourself (if only you do know it) he has for
several days past locked himself in as soon as night or even evening
comes on. Of late you’ve been going upstairs to your room early every
evening, and yesterday you did not come down at all, and so perhaps you
don’t know how carefully he has begun to lock himself in at night, and
even if Grigory Vassilyevitch comes to the door he won’t open to him
till he hears his voice. But Grigory Vassilyevitch does not come,
because I wait upon him alone in his room now. That’s the arrangement
he made himself ever since this to-do with Agrafena Alexandrovna began.
But at night, by his orders, I go away to the lodge so that I don’t get
to sleep till midnight, but am on the watch, getting up and walking
about the yard, waiting for Agrafena Alexandrovna to come. For the last
few days he’s been perfectly frantic expecting her. What he argues is,
she is afraid of him, Dmitri Fyodorovitch (Mitya, as he calls him),
‘and so,’ says he, ‘she’ll come the back-way, late at night, to me. You
look out for her,’ says he, ‘till midnight and later; and if she does
come, you run up and knock at my door or at the window from the garden.
Knock at first twice, rather gently, and then three times more quickly,
then,’ says he, ‘I shall understand at once that she has come, and will
open the door to you quietly.’ Another signal he gave me in case
anything unexpected happens. At first, two knocks, and then, after an
interval, another much louder. Then he will understand that something
has happened suddenly and that I must see him, and he will open to me
so that I can go and speak to him. That’s all in case Agrafena
Alexandrovna can’t come herself, but sends a message. Besides, Dmitri
Fyodorovitch might come, too, so I must let him know he is near. His
honor is awfully afraid of Dmitri Fyodorovitch, so that even if
Agrafena Alexandrovna had come and were locked in with him, and Dmitri
Fyodorovitch were to turn up anywhere near at the time, I should be
bound to let him know at once, knocking three times. So that the first
signal of five knocks means Agrafena Alexandrovna has come, while the
second signal of three knocks means ‘something important to tell you.’
His honor has shown me them several times and explained them. And as in
the whole universe no one knows of these signals but myself and his
honor, so he’d open the door without the slightest hesitation and
without calling out (he is awfully afraid of calling out aloud). Well,
those signals are known to Dmitri Fyodorovitch too, now.”

“How are they known? Did you tell him? How dared you tell him?”

“It was through fright I did it. How could I dare to keep it back from
him? Dmitri Fyodorovitch kept persisting every day, ‘You are deceiving
me, you are hiding something from me! I’ll break both your legs for
you.’ So I told him those secret signals that he might see my slavish
devotion, and might be satisfied that I was not deceiving him, but was
telling him all I could.”

“If you think that he’ll make use of those signals and try to get in,
don’t let him in.”

“But if I should be laid up with a fit, how can I prevent him coming in
then, even if I dared prevent him, knowing how desperate he is?”

“Hang it! How can you be so sure you are going to have a fit, confound
you? Are you laughing at me?”

“How could I dare laugh at you? I am in no laughing humor with this
fear on me. I feel I am going to have a fit. I have a presentiment.
Fright alone will bring it on.”

“Confound it! If you are laid up, Grigory will be on the watch. Let
Grigory know beforehand; he will be sure not to let him in.”

“I should never dare to tell Grigory Vassilyevitch about the signals
without orders from my master. And as for Grigory Vassilyevitch hearing
him and not admitting him, he has been ill ever since yesterday, and
Marfa Ignatyevna intends to give him medicine to-morrow. They’ve just
arranged it. It’s a very strange remedy of hers. Marfa Ignatyevna knows
of a preparation and always keeps it. It’s a strong thing made from
some herb. She has the secret of it, and she always gives it to Grigory
Vassilyevitch three times a year when his lumbago’s so bad he is almost
paralyzed by it. Then she takes a towel, wets it with the stuff, and
rubs his whole back for half an hour till it’s quite red and swollen,
and what’s left in the bottle she gives him to drink with a special
prayer; but not quite all, for on such occasions she leaves some for
herself, and drinks it herself. And as they never take strong drink, I
assure you they both drop asleep at once and sleep sound a very long
time. And when Grigory Vassilyevitch wakes up he is perfectly well
after it, but Marfa Ignatyevna always has a headache from it. So, if
Marfa Ignatyevna carries out her intention to-morrow, they won’t hear
anything and hinder Dmitri Fyodorovitch. They’ll be asleep.”

“What a rigmarole! And it all seems to happen at once, as though it
were planned. You’ll have a fit and they’ll both be unconscious,” cried
Ivan. “But aren’t you trying to arrange it so?” broke from him
suddenly, and he frowned threateningly.

“How could I?... And why should I, when it all depends on Dmitri
Fyodorovitch and his plans?... If he means to do anything, he’ll do it;
but if not, I shan’t be thrusting him upon his father.”

“And why should he go to father, especially on the sly, if, as you say
yourself, Agrafena Alexandrovna won’t come at all?” Ivan went on,
turning white with anger. “You say that yourself, and all the while
I’ve been here, I’ve felt sure it was all the old man’s fancy, and the
creature won’t come to him. Why should Dmitri break in on him if she
doesn’t come? Speak, I want to know what you are thinking!”

“You know yourself why he’ll come. What’s the use of what I think? His
honor will come simply because he is in a rage or suspicious on account
of my illness perhaps, and he’ll dash in, as he did yesterday through
impatience to search the rooms, to see whether she hasn’t escaped him
on the sly. He is perfectly well aware, too, that Fyodor Pavlovitch has
a big envelope with three thousand roubles in it, tied up with ribbon
and sealed with three seals. On it is written in his own hand, ‘To my
angel Grushenka, if she will come,’ to which he added three days later,
‘for my little chicken.’ There’s no knowing what that might do.”

“Nonsense!” cried Ivan, almost beside himself. “Dmitri won’t come to
steal money and kill my father to do it. He might have killed him
yesterday on account of Grushenka, like the frantic, savage fool he is,
but he won’t steal.”

“He is in very great need of money now—the greatest need, Ivan
Fyodorovitch. You don’t know in what need he is,” Smerdyakov explained,
with perfect composure and remarkable distinctness. “He looks on that
three thousand as his own, too. He said so to me himself. ‘My father
still owes me just three thousand,’ he said. And besides that,
consider, Ivan Fyodorovitch, there is something else perfectly true.
It’s as good as certain, so to say, that Agrafena Alexandrovna will
force him, if only she cares to, to marry her—the master himself, I
mean, Fyodor Pavlovitch—if only she cares to, and of course she may
care to. All I’ve said is that she won’t come, but maybe she’s looking
for more than that—I mean to be mistress here. I know myself that
Samsonov, her merchant, was laughing with her about it, telling her
quite openly that it would not be at all a stupid thing to do. And
she’s got plenty of sense. She wouldn’t marry a beggar like Dmitri
Fyodorovitch. So, taking that into consideration, Ivan Fyodorovitch,
reflect that then neither Dmitri Fyodorovitch nor yourself and your
brother, Alexey Fyodorovitch, would have anything after the master’s
death, not a rouble, for Agrafena Alexandrovna would marry him simply
to get hold of the whole, all the money there is. But if your father
were to die now, there’d be some forty thousand for sure, even for
Dmitri Fyodorovitch whom he hates so, for he’s made no will.... Dmitri
Fyodorovitch knows all that very well.”

A sort of shudder passed over Ivan’s face. He suddenly flushed.

“Then why on earth,” he suddenly interrupted Smerdyakov, “do you advise
me to go to Tchermashnya? What did you mean by that? If I go away, you
see what will happen here.” Ivan drew his breath with difficulty.

“Precisely so,” said Smerdyakov, softly and reasonably, watching Ivan
intently, however.

“What do you mean by ‘precisely so’?” Ivan questioned him, with a
menacing light in his eyes, restraining himself with difficulty.

“I spoke because I felt sorry for you. If I were in your place I should
simply throw it all up ... rather than stay on in such a position,”
answered Smerdyakov, with the most candid air looking at Ivan’s
flashing eyes. They were both silent.

“You seem to be a perfect idiot, and what’s more ... an awful
scoundrel, too.” Ivan rose suddenly from the bench. He was about to
pass straight through the gate, but he stopped short and turned to
Smerdyakov. Something strange followed. Ivan, in a sudden paroxysm, bit
his lip, clenched his fists, and, in another minute, would have flung
himself on Smerdyakov. The latter, anyway, noticed it at the same
moment, started, and shrank back. But the moment passed without
mischief to Smerdyakov, and Ivan turned in silence, as it seemed in
perplexity, to the gate.

“I am going away to Moscow to-morrow, if you care to know—early
to-morrow morning. That’s all!” he suddenly said aloud angrily, and
wondered himself afterwards what need there was to say this then to
Smerdyakov.

“That’s the best thing you can do,” he responded, as though he had
expected to hear it; “except that you can always be telegraphed for
from Moscow, if anything should happen here.”

Ivan stopped again, and again turned quickly to Smerdyakov. But a
change had passed over him, too. All his familiarity and carelessness
had completely disappeared. His face expressed attention and
expectation, intent but timid and cringing.

“Haven’t you something more to say—something to add?” could be read in
the intent gaze he fixed on Ivan.

“And couldn’t I be sent for from Tchermashnya, too—in case anything
happened?” Ivan shouted suddenly, for some unknown reason raising his
voice.

“From Tchermashnya, too ... you could be sent for,” Smerdyakov
muttered, almost in a whisper, looking disconcerted, but gazing
intently into Ivan’s eyes.

“Only Moscow is farther and Tchermashnya is nearer. Is it to save my
spending money on the fare, or to save my going so far out of my way,
that you insist on Tchermashnya?”

“Precisely so ...” muttered Smerdyakov, with a breaking voice. He
looked at Ivan with a revolting smile, and again made ready to draw
back. But to his astonishment Ivan broke into a laugh, and went through
the gate still laughing. Any one who had seen his face at that moment
would have known that he was not laughing from lightness of heart, and
he could not have explained himself what he was feeling at that
instant. He moved and walked as though in a nervous frenzy.




Chapter VII.
“It’s Always Worth While Speaking To A Clever Man”


And in the same nervous frenzy, too, he spoke. Meeting Fyodor
Pavlovitch in the drawing-room directly he went in, he shouted to him,
waving his hands, “I am going upstairs to my room, not in to you.
Good-by!” and passed by, trying not even to look at his father. Very
possibly the old man was too hateful to him at that moment; but such an
unceremonious display of hostility was a surprise even to Fyodor
Pavlovitch. And the old man evidently wanted to tell him something at
once and had come to meet him in the drawing-room on purpose. Receiving
this amiable greeting, he stood still in silence and with an ironical
air watched his son going upstairs, till he passed out of sight.

“What’s the matter with him?” he promptly asked Smerdyakov, who had
followed Ivan.

“Angry about something. Who can tell?” the valet muttered evasively.

“Confound him! Let him be angry then. Bring in the samovar, and get
along with you. Look sharp! No news?”

Then followed a series of questions such as Smerdyakov had just
complained of to Ivan, all relating to his expected visitor, and these
questions we will omit. Half an hour later the house was locked, and
the crazy old man was wandering along through the rooms in excited
expectation of hearing every minute the five knocks agreed upon. Now
and then he peered out into the darkness, seeing nothing.

It was very late, but Ivan was still awake and reflecting. He sat up
late that night, till two o’clock. But we will not give an account of
his thoughts, and this is not the place to look into that soul—its turn
will come. And even if one tried, it would be very hard to give an
account of them, for there were no thoughts in his brain, but something
very vague, and, above all, intense excitement. He felt himself that he
had lost his bearings. He was fretted, too, by all sorts of strange and
almost surprising desires; for instance, after midnight he suddenly had
an intense irresistible inclination to go down, open the door, go to
the lodge and beat Smerdyakov. But if he had been asked why, he could
not have given any exact reason, except perhaps that he loathed the
valet as one who had insulted him more gravely than any one in the
world. On the other hand, he was more than once that night overcome by
a sort of inexplicable humiliating terror, which he felt positively
paralyzed his physical powers. His head ached and he was giddy. A
feeling of hatred was rankling in his heart, as though he meant to
avenge himself on some one. He even hated Alyosha, recalling the
conversation he had just had with him. At moments he hated himself
intensely. Of Katerina Ivanovna he almost forgot to think, and wondered
greatly at this afterwards, especially as he remembered perfectly that
when he had protested so valiantly to Katerina Ivanovna that he would
go away next day to Moscow, something had whispered in his heart,
“That’s nonsense, you are not going, and it won’t be so easy to tear
yourself away as you are boasting now.”

Remembering that night long afterwards, Ivan recalled with peculiar
repulsion how he had suddenly got up from the sofa and had stealthily,
as though he were afraid of being watched, opened the door, gone out on
the staircase and listened to Fyodor Pavlovitch stirring down below,
had listened a long while—some five minutes—with a sort of strange
curiosity, holding his breath while his heart throbbed. And why he had
done all this, why he was listening, he could not have said. That
“action” all his life afterwards he called “infamous,” and at the
bottom of his heart, he thought of it as the basest action of his life.
For Fyodor Pavlovitch himself he felt no hatred at that moment, but was
simply intensely curious to know how he was walking down there below
and what he must be doing now. He wondered and imagined how he must be
peeping out of the dark windows and stopping in the middle of the room,
listening, listening—for some one to knock. Ivan went out on to the
stairs twice to listen like this.

About two o’clock when everything was quiet, and even Fyodor Pavlovitch
had gone to bed, Ivan had got into bed, firmly resolved to fall asleep
at once, as he felt fearfully exhausted. And he did fall asleep at
once, and slept soundly without dreams, but waked early, at seven
o’clock, when it was broad daylight. Opening his eyes, he was surprised
to feel himself extraordinarily vigorous. He jumped up at once and
dressed quickly; then dragged out his trunk and began packing
immediately. His linen had come back from the laundress the previous
morning. Ivan positively smiled at the thought that everything was
helping his sudden departure. And his departure certainly was sudden.
Though Ivan had said the day before (to Katerina Ivanovna, Alyosha, and
Smerdyakov) that he was leaving next day, yet he remembered that he had
no thought of departure when he went to bed, or, at least, had not
dreamed that his first act in the morning would be to pack his trunk.
At last his trunk and bag were ready. It was about nine o’clock when
Marfa Ignatyevna came in with her usual inquiry, “Where will your honor
take your tea, in your own room or downstairs?” He looked almost
cheerful, but there was about him, about his words and gestures,
something hurried and scattered. Greeting his father affably, and even
inquiring specially after his health, though he did not wait to hear
his answer to the end, he announced that he was starting