 Kalganov, and clasped his hand
tightly. “I ... I’m coming, too. I’m here till morning. Gentlemen, may
I stay with you till morning? Only till morning, for the last time, in
this same room?”

So he finished, turning to the fat little man, with the pipe, sitting
on the sofa. The latter removed his pipe from his lips with dignity and
observed severely:

“_Panie_, we’re here in private. There are other rooms.”

“Why, it’s you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch! What do you mean?” answered
Kalganov suddenly. “Sit down with us. How are you?”

“Delighted to see you, dear ... and precious fellow, I always thought a
lot of you.” Mitya responded, joyfully and eagerly, at once holding out
his hand across the table.

“Aie! How tight you squeeze! You’ve quite broken my fingers,” laughed
Kalganov.

“He always squeezes like that, always,” Grushenka put in gayly, with a
timid smile, seeming suddenly convinced from Mitya’s face that he was
not going to make a scene. She was watching him with intense curiosity
and still some uneasiness. She was impressed by something about him,
and indeed the last thing she expected of him was that he would come in
and speak like this at such a moment.

“Good evening,” Maximov ventured blandly on the left. Mitya rushed up
to him, too.

“Good evening. You’re here, too! How glad I am to find you here, too!
Gentlemen, gentlemen, I—” (He addressed the Polish gentleman with the
pipe again, evidently taking him for the most important person
present.) “I flew here.... I wanted to spend my last day, my last hour
in this room, in this very room ... where I, too, adored ... my
queen.... Forgive me, _panie_,” he cried wildly, “I flew here and
vowed— Oh, don’t be afraid, it’s my last night! Let’s drink to our good
understanding. They’ll bring the wine at once.... I brought this with
me.” (Something made him pull out his bundle of notes.) “Allow me,
_panie_! I want to have music, singing, a revel, as we had before. But
the worm, the unnecessary worm, will crawl away, and there’ll be no
more of him. I will commemorate my day of joy on my last night.”

He was almost choking. There was so much, so much he wanted to say, but
strange exclamations were all that came from his lips. The Pole gazed
fixedly at him, at the bundle of notes in his hand; looked at
Grushenka, and was in evident perplexity.

“If my suverin lady is permitting—” he was beginning.

“What does ‘suverin’ mean? ‘Sovereign,’ I suppose?” interrupted
Grushenka. “I can’t help laughing at you, the way you talk. Sit down,
Mitya, what are you talking about? Don’t frighten us, please. You won’t
frighten us, will you? If you won’t, I am glad to see you ...”

“Me, me frighten you?” cried Mitya, flinging up his hands. “Oh, pass me
by, go your way, I won’t hinder you!...”

And suddenly he surprised them all, and no doubt himself as well, by
flinging himself on a chair, and bursting into tears, turning his head
away to the opposite wall, while his arms clasped the back of the chair
tight, as though embracing it.

“Come, come, what a fellow you are!” cried Grushenka reproachfully.
“That’s just how he comes to see me—he begins talking, and I can’t make
out what he means. He cried like that once before, and now he’s crying
again! It’s shameful! Why are you crying? _As though you had anything
to cry for!_” she added enigmatically, emphasizing each word with some
irritability.

“I ... I’m not crying.... Well, good evening!” He instantly turned
round in his chair, and suddenly laughed, not his abrupt wooden laugh,
but a long, quivering, inaudible nervous laugh.

“Well, there you are again.... Come, cheer up, cheer up!” Grushenka
said to him persuasively. “I’m very glad you’ve come, very glad, Mitya,
do you hear, I’m very glad! I want him to stay here with us,” she said
peremptorily, addressing the whole company, though her words were
obviously meant for the man sitting on the sofa. “I wish it, I wish it!
And if he goes away I shall go, too!” she added with flashing eyes.

“What my queen commands is law!” pronounced the Pole, gallantly kissing
Grushenka’s hand. “I beg you, _panie_, to join our company,” he added
politely, addressing Mitya.

Mitya was jumping up with the obvious intention of delivering another
tirade, but the words did not come.

“Let’s drink, _panie_,” he blurted out instead of making a speech.
Every one laughed.

“Good heavens! I thought he was going to begin again!” Grushenka
exclaimed nervously. “Do you hear, Mitya,” she went on insistently,
“don’t prance about, but it’s nice you’ve brought the champagne. I want
some myself, and I can’t bear liqueurs. And best of all, you’ve come
yourself. We were fearfully dull here.... You’ve come for a spree
again, I suppose? But put your money in your pocket. Where did you get
such a lot?”

Mitya had been, all this time, holding in his hand the crumpled bundle
of notes on which the eyes of all, especially of the Poles, were fixed.
In confusion he thrust them hurriedly into his pocket. He flushed. At
that moment the innkeeper brought in an uncorked bottle of champagne,
and glasses on a tray. Mitya snatched up the bottle, but he was so
bewildered that he did not know what to do with it. Kalganov took it
from him and poured out the champagne.

“Another! Another bottle!” Mitya cried to the innkeeper, and,
forgetting to clink glasses with the Pole whom he had so solemnly
invited to drink to their good understanding, he drank off his glass
without waiting for any one else. His whole countenance suddenly
changed. The solemn and tragic expression with which he had entered
vanished completely, and a look of something childlike came into his
face. He seemed to have become suddenly gentle and subdued. He looked
shyly and happily at every one, with a continual nervous little laugh,
and the blissful expression of a dog who has done wrong, been punished,
and forgiven. He seemed to have forgotten everything, and was looking
round at every one with a childlike smile of delight. He looked at
Grushenka, laughing continually, and bringing his chair close up to
her. By degrees he had gained some idea of the two Poles, though he had
formed no definite conception of them yet.

The Pole on the sofa struck him by his dignified demeanor and his
Polish accent; and, above all, by his pipe. “Well, what of it? It’s a
good thing he’s smoking a pipe,” he reflected. The Pole’s puffy,
middle-aged face, with its tiny nose and two very thin, pointed, dyed
and impudent-looking mustaches, had not so far roused the faintest
doubts in Mitya. He was not even particularly struck by the Pole’s
absurd wig made in Siberia, with love-locks foolishly combed forward
over the temples. “I suppose it’s all right since he wears a wig,” he
went on, musing blissfully. The other, younger Pole, who was staring
insolently and defiantly at the company and listening to the
conversation with silent contempt, still only impressed Mitya by his
great height, which was in striking contrast to the Pole on the sofa.
“If he stood up he’d be six foot three.” The thought flitted through
Mitya’s mind. It occurred to him, too, that this Pole must be the
friend of the other, as it were, a “bodyguard,” and no doubt the big
Pole was at the disposal of the little Pole with the pipe. But this all
seemed to Mitya perfectly right and not to be questioned. In his mood
of doglike submissiveness all feeling of rivalry had died away.

Grushenka’s mood and the enigmatic tone of some of her words he
completely failed to grasp. All he understood, with thrilling heart,
was that she was kind to him, that she had forgiven him, and made him
sit by her. He was beside himself with delight, watching her sip her
glass of champagne. The silence of the company seemed somehow to strike
him, however, and he looked round at every one with expectant eyes.

“Why are we sitting here though, gentlemen? Why don’t you begin doing
something?” his smiling eyes seemed to ask.

“He keeps talking nonsense, and we were all laughing,” Kalganov began
suddenly, as though divining his thought, and pointing to Maximov.

Mitya immediately stared at Kalganov and then at Maximov.

“He’s talking nonsense?” he laughed, his short, wooden laugh, seeming
suddenly delighted at something—“ha ha!”

“Yes. Would you believe it, he will have it that all our cavalry
officers in the twenties married Polish women. That’s awful rot, isn’t
it?”

“Polish women?” repeated Mitya, perfectly ecstatic.

Kalganov was well aware of Mitya’s attitude to Grushenka, and he
guessed about the Pole, too, but that did not so much interest him,
perhaps did not interest him at all; what he was interested in was
Maximov. He had come here with Maximov by chance, and he met the Poles
here at the inn for the first time in his life. Grushenka he knew
before, and had once been with some one to see her; but she had not
taken to him. But here she looked at him very affectionately: before
Mitya’s arrival, she had been making much of him, but he seemed somehow
to be unmoved by it. He was a boy, not over twenty, dressed like a
dandy, with a very charming fair-skinned face, and splendid thick,
fair hair. From his fair face looked out beautiful pale blue eyes, with
an intelligent and sometimes even deep expression, beyond his age
indeed, although the young man sometimes looked and talked quite like a
child, and was not at all ashamed of it, even when he was aware of it
himself. As a rule he was very willful, even capricious, though always
friendly. Sometimes there was something fixed and obstinate in his
expression. He would look at you and listen, seeming all the while to
be persistently dreaming over something else. Often he was listless and
lazy, at other times he would grow excited, sometimes, apparently, over
the most trivial matters.

“Only imagine, I’ve been taking him about with me for the last four
days,” he went on, indolently drawling his words, quite naturally
though, without the slightest affectation. “Ever since your brother, do
you remember, shoved him off the carriage and sent him flying. That
made me take an interest in him at the time, and I took him into the
country, but he keeps talking such rot I’m ashamed to be with him. I’m
taking him back.”

“The gentleman has not seen Polish ladies, and says what is
impossible,” the Pole with the pipe observed to Maximov.

He spoke Russian fairly well, much better, anyway, than he pretended.
If he used Russian words, he always distorted them into a Polish form.

“But I was married to a Polish lady myself,” tittered Maximov.

“But did you serve in the cavalry? You were talking about the cavalry.
Were you a cavalry officer?” put in Kalganov at once.

“Was he a cavalry officer indeed? Ha ha!” cried Mitya, listening
eagerly, and turning his inquiring eyes to each as he spoke, as though
there were no knowing what he might hear from each.

“No, you see,” Maximov turned to him. “What I mean is that those pretty
Polish ladies ... when they danced the mazurka with our Uhlans ... when
one of them dances a mazurka with a Uhlan she jumps on his knee like a
kitten ... a little white one ... and the _pan_-father and _pan_-mother
look on and allow it.... They allow it ... and next day the Uhlan comes
and offers her his hand.... That’s how it is ... offers her his hand,
he he!” Maximov ended, tittering.

“The _pan_ is a _lajdak_!” the tall Pole on the chair growled suddenly
and crossed one leg over the other. Mitya’s eye was caught by his huge
greased boot, with its thick, dirty sole. The dress of both the Poles
looked rather greasy.

“Well, now it’s _lajdak_! What’s he scolding about?” said Grushenka,
suddenly vexed.

“_Pani_ Agrippina, what the gentleman saw in Poland were servant girls,
and not ladies of good birth,” the Pole with the pipe observed to
Grushenka.

“You can reckon on that,” the tall Pole snapped contemptuously.

“What next! Let him talk! People talk, why hinder them? It makes it
cheerful,” Grushenka said crossly.

“I’m not hindering them, _pani_,” said the Pole in the wig, with a long
look at Grushenka, and relapsing into dignified silence he sucked his
pipe again.

“No, no. The Polish gentleman spoke the truth.” Kalganov got excited
again, as though it were a question of vast import. “He’s never been in
Poland, so how can he talk about it? I suppose you weren’t married in
Poland, were you?”

“No, in the Province of Smolensk. Only, a Uhlan had brought her to
Russia before that, my future wife, with her mamma and her aunt, and
another female relation with a grown-up son. He brought her straight
from Poland and gave her up to me. He was a lieutenant in our regiment,
a very nice young man. At first he meant to marry her himself. But he
didn’t marry her, because she turned out to be lame.”

“So you married a lame woman?” cried Kalganov.

“Yes. They both deceived me a little bit at the time, and concealed it.
I thought she was hopping; she kept hopping.... I thought it was for
fun.”

“So pleased she was going to marry you!” yelled Kalganov, in a ringing,
childish voice.

“Yes, so pleased. But it turned out to be quite a different cause.
Afterwards, when we were married, after the wedding, that very evening,
she confessed, and very touchingly asked forgiveness. ‘I once jumped
over a puddle when I was a child,’ she said, ‘and injured my leg.’ He
he!”

Kalganov went off into the most childish laughter, almost falling on
the sofa. Grushenka, too, laughed. Mitya was at the pinnacle of
happiness.

“Do you know, that’s the truth, he’s not lying now,” exclaimed
Kalganov, turning to Mitya; “and do you know, he’s been married twice;
it’s his first wife he’s talking about. But his second wife, do you
know, ran away, and is alive now.”

“Is it possible?” said Mitya, turning quickly to Maximov with an
expression of the utmost astonishment.

“Yes. She did run away. I’ve had that unpleasant experience,” Maximov
modestly assented, “with a _monsieur_. And what was worse, she’d had
all my little property transferred to her beforehand. ‘You’re an
educated man,’ she said to me. ‘You can always get your living.’ She
settled my business with that. A venerable bishop once said to me: ‘One
of your wives was lame, but the other was too light-footed.’ He he!”

“Listen, listen!” cried Kalganov, bubbling over, “if he’s telling
lies—and he often is—he’s only doing it to amuse us all. There’s no
harm in that, is there? You know, I sometimes like him. He’s awfully
low, but it’s natural to him, eh? Don’t you think so? Some people are
low from self-interest, but he’s simply so, from nature. Only fancy,
he claims (he was arguing about it all the way yesterday) that Gogol
wrote _Dead Souls_ about him. Do you remember, there’s a landowner
called Maximov in it, whom Nozdryov thrashed. He was charged, do you
remember, ‘for inflicting bodily injury with rods on the landowner
Maximov in a drunken condition.’ Would you believe it, he claims that
he was that Maximov and that he was beaten! Now can it be so?
Tchitchikov made his journey, at the very latest, at the beginning of
the twenties, so that the dates don’t fit. He couldn’t have been
thrashed then, he couldn’t, could he?”

It was difficult to imagine what Kalganov was excited about, but his
excitement was genuine. Mitya followed his lead without protest.

“Well, but if they did thrash him!” he cried, laughing.

“It’s not that they thrashed me exactly, but what I mean is—” put in
Maximov.

“What do you mean? Either they thrashed you or they didn’t.”

“What o’clock is it, _panie_?” the Pole, with the pipe, asked his tall
friend, with a bored expression. The other shrugged his shoulders in
reply. Neither of them had a watch.

“Why not talk? Let other people talk. Mustn’t other people talk because
you’re bored?” Grushenka flew at him with evident intention of finding
fault. Something seemed for the first time to flash upon Mitya’s mind.
This time the Pole answered with unmistakable irritability.

“_Pani_, I didn’t oppose it. I didn’t say anything.”

“All right then. Come, tell us your story,” Grushenka cried to Maximov.
“Why are you all silent?”

“There’s nothing to tell, it’s all so foolish,” answered Maximov at
once, with evident satisfaction, mincing a little. “Besides, all that’s
by way of allegory in Gogol, for he’s made all the names have a
meaning. Nozdryov was really called Nosov, and Kuvshinikov had quite a
different name, he was called Shkvornev. Fenardi really was called
Fenardi, only he wasn’t an Italian but a Russian, and Mamsel Fenardi
was a pretty girl with her pretty little legs in tights, and she had a
little short skirt with spangles, and she kept turning round and round,
only not for four hours but for four minutes only, and she bewitched
every one...”

“But what were you beaten for?” cried Kalganov.

“For Piron!” answered Maximov.

“What Piron?” cried Mitya.

“The famous French writer, Piron. We were all drinking then, a big
party of us, in a tavern at that very fair. They’d invited me, and
first of all I began quoting epigrams. ‘Is that you, Boileau? What a
funny get-up!’ and Boileau answers that he’s going to a masquerade,
that is to the baths, he he! And they took it to