 Thou hast given to us the right to bind
and to unbind, and now, of course, Thou canst not think of taking it
away. Why, then, hast Thou come to hinder us?’”

“And what’s the meaning of ‘no lack of admonitions and warnings’?”
asked Alyosha.

“Why, that’s the chief part of what the old man must say.

“‘The wise and dread spirit, the spirit of self-destruction and non-
existence,’ the old man goes on, ‘the great spirit talked with Thee in
the wilderness, and we are told in the books that he “tempted” Thee. Is
that so? And could anything truer be said than what he revealed to Thee
in three questions and what Thou didst reject, and what in the books is
called “the temptation”? And yet if there has ever been on earth a real
stupendous miracle, it took place on that day, on the day of the three
temptations. The statement of those three questions was itself the
miracle. If it were possible to imagine simply for the sake of argument
that those three questions of the dread spirit had perished utterly
from the books, and that we had to restore them and to invent them
anew, and to do so had gathered together all the wise men of the
earth—rulers, chief priests, learned men, philosophers, poets—and had
set them the task to invent three questions, such as would not only fit
the occasion, but express in three words, three human phrases, the
whole future history of the world and of humanity—dost Thou believe
that all the wisdom of the earth united could have invented anything in
depth and force equal to the three questions which were actually put to
Thee then by the wise and mighty spirit in the wilderness? From those
questions alone, from the miracle of their statement, we can see that
we have here to do not with the fleeting human intelligence, but with
the absolute and eternal. For in those three questions the whole
subsequent history of mankind is, as it were, brought together into one
whole, and foretold, and in them are united all the unsolved historical
contradictions of human nature. At the time it could not be so clear,
since the future was unknown; but now that fifteen hundred years have
passed, we see that everything in those three questions was so justly
divined and foretold, and has been so truly fulfilled, that nothing can
be added to them or taken from them.

“‘Judge Thyself who was right—Thou or he who questioned Thee then?
Remember the first question; its meaning, in other words, was this:
“Thou wouldst go into the world, and art going with empty hands, with
some promise of freedom which men in their simplicity and their natural
unruliness cannot even understand, which they fear and dread—for
nothing has ever been more insupportable for a man and a human society
than freedom. But seest Thou these stones in this parched and barren
wilderness? Turn them into bread, and mankind will run after Thee like
a flock of sheep, grateful and obedient, though for ever trembling,
lest Thou withdraw Thy hand and deny them Thy bread.” But Thou wouldst
not deprive man of freedom and didst reject the offer, thinking, what
is that freedom worth, if obedience is bought with bread? Thou didst
reply that man lives not by bread alone. But dost Thou know that for
the sake of that earthly bread the spirit of the earth will rise up
against Thee and will strive with Thee and overcome Thee, and all will
follow him, crying, “Who can compare with this beast? He has given us
fire from heaven!” Dost Thou know that the ages will pass, and humanity
will proclaim by the lips of their sages that there is no crime, and
therefore no sin; there is only hunger? “Feed men, and then ask of them
virtue!” that’s what they’ll write on the banner, which they will raise
against Thee, and with which they will destroy Thy temple. Where Thy
temple stood will rise a new building; the terrible tower of Babel will
be built again, and though, like the one of old, it will not be
finished, yet Thou mightest have prevented that new tower and have cut
short the sufferings of men for a thousand years; for they will come
back to us after a thousand years of agony with their tower. They will
seek us again, hidden underground in the catacombs, for we shall be
again persecuted and tortured. They will find us and cry to us, “Feed
us, for those who have promised us fire from heaven haven’t given it!”
And then we shall finish building their tower, for he finishes the
building who feeds them. And we alone shall feed them in Thy name,
declaring falsely that it is in Thy name. Oh, never, never can they
feed themselves without us! No science will give them bread so long as
they remain free. In the end they will lay their freedom at our feet,
and say to us, “Make us your slaves, but feed us.” They will understand
themselves, at last, that freedom and bread enough for all are
inconceivable together, for never, never will they be able to share
between them! They will be convinced, too, that they can never be free,
for they are weak, vicious, worthless and rebellious. Thou didst
promise them the bread of Heaven, but, I repeat again, can it compare
with earthly bread in the eyes of the weak, ever sinful and ignoble
race of man? And if for the sake of the bread of Heaven thousands shall
follow Thee, what is to become of the millions and tens of thousands of
millions of creatures who will not have the strength to forego the
earthly bread for the sake of the heavenly? Or dost Thou care only for
the tens of thousands of the great and strong, while the millions,
numerous as the sands of the sea, who are weak but love Thee, must
exist only for the sake of the great and strong? No, we care for the
weak too. They are sinful and rebellious, but in the end they too will
become obedient. They will marvel at us and look on us as gods, because
we are ready to endure the freedom which they have found so dreadful
and to rule over them—so awful it will seem to them to be free. But we
shall tell them that we are Thy servants and rule them in Thy name. We
shall deceive them again, for we will not let Thee come to us again.
That deception will be our suffering, for we shall be forced to lie.

“‘This is the significance of the first question in the wilderness,
and this is what Thou hast rejected for the sake of that freedom which
Thou hast exalted above everything. Yet in this question lies hid the
great secret of this world. Choosing “bread,” Thou wouldst have
satisfied the universal and everlasting craving of humanity—to find
some one to worship. So long as man remains free he strives for nothing
so incessantly and so painfully as to find some one to worship. But man
seeks to worship what is established beyond dispute, so that all men
would agree at once to worship it. For these pitiful creatures are
concerned not only to find what one or the other can worship, but to
find something that all would believe in and worship; what is essential
is that all may be _together_ in it. This craving for _community_ of
worship is the chief misery of every man individually and of all
humanity from the beginning of time. For the sake of common worship
they’ve slain each other with the sword. They have set up gods and
challenged one another, “Put away your gods and come and worship ours,
or we will kill you and your gods!” And so it will be to the end of the
world, even when gods disappear from the earth; they will fall down
before idols just the same. Thou didst know, Thou couldst not but have
known, this fundamental secret of human nature, but Thou didst reject
the one infallible banner which was offered Thee to make all men bow
down to Thee alone—the banner of earthly bread; and Thou hast rejected
it for the sake of freedom and the bread of Heaven. Behold what Thou
didst further. And all again in the name of freedom! I tell Thee that
man is tormented by no greater anxiety than to find some one quickly to
whom he can hand over that gift of freedom with which the ill-fated
creature is born. But only one who can appease their conscience can
take over their freedom. In bread there was offered Thee an invincible
banner; give bread, and man will worship thee, for nothing is more
certain than bread. But if some one else gains possession of his
conscience—oh! then he will cast away Thy bread and follow after him
who has ensnared his conscience. In that Thou wast right. For the
secret of man’s being is not only to live but to have something to live
for. Without a stable conception of the object of life, man would not
consent to go on living, and would rather destroy himself than remain
on earth, though he had bread in abundance. That is true. But what
happened? Instead of taking men’s freedom from them, Thou didst make it
greater than ever! Didst Thou forget that man prefers peace, and even
death, to freedom of choice in the knowledge of good and evil? Nothing
is more seductive for man than his freedom of conscience, but nothing
is a greater cause of suffering. And behold, instead of giving a firm
foundation for setting the conscience of man at rest for ever, Thou
didst choose all that is exceptional, vague and enigmatic; Thou didst
choose what was utterly beyond the strength of men, acting as though
Thou didst not love them at all—Thou who didst come to give Thy life
for them! Instead of taking possession of men’s freedom, Thou didst
increase it, and burdened the spiritual kingdom of mankind with its
sufferings for ever. Thou didst desire man’s free love, that he should
follow Thee freely, enticed and taken captive by Thee. In place of the
rigid ancient law, man must hereafter with free heart decide for
himself what is good and what is evil, having only Thy image before him
as his guide. But didst Thou not know that he would at last reject even
Thy image and Thy truth, if he is weighed down with the fearful burden
of free choice? They will cry aloud at last that the truth is not in
Thee, for they could not have been left in greater confusion and
suffering than Thou hast caused, laying upon them so many cares and
unanswerable problems.

“‘So that, in truth, Thou didst Thyself lay the foundation for the
destruction of Thy kingdom, and no one is more to blame for it. Yet
what was offered Thee? There are three powers, three powers alone, able
to conquer and to hold captive for ever the conscience of these
impotent rebels for their happiness—those forces are miracle, mystery
and authority. Thou hast rejected all three and hast set the example
for doing so. When the wise and dread spirit set Thee on the pinnacle
of the temple and said to Thee, “If Thou wouldst know whether Thou art
the Son of God then cast Thyself down, for it is written: the angels
shall hold him up lest he fall and bruise himself, and Thou shalt know
then whether Thou art the Son of God and shalt prove then how great is
Thy faith in Thy Father.” But Thou didst refuse and wouldst not cast
Thyself down. Oh, of course, Thou didst proudly and well, like God; but
the weak, unruly race of men, are they gods? Oh, Thou didst know then
that in taking one step, in making one movement to cast Thyself down,
Thou wouldst be tempting God and have lost all Thy faith in Him, and
wouldst have been dashed to pieces against that earth which Thou didst
come to save. And the wise spirit that tempted Thee would have
rejoiced. But I ask again, are there many like Thee? And couldst Thou
believe for one moment that men, too, could face such a temptation? Is
the nature of men such, that they can reject miracle, and at the great
moments of their life, the moments of their deepest, most agonizing
spiritual difficulties, cling only to the free verdict of the heart?
Oh, Thou didst know that Thy deed would be recorded in books, would be
handed down to remote times and the utmost ends of the earth, and Thou
didst hope that man, following Thee, would cling to God and not ask for
a miracle. But Thou didst not know that when man rejects miracle he
rejects God too; for man seeks not so much God as the miraculous. And
as man cannot bear to be without the miraculous, he will create new
miracles of his own for himself, and will worship deeds of sorcery and
witchcraft, though he might be a hundred times over a rebel, heretic
and infidel. Thou didst not come down from the Cross when they shouted
to Thee, mocking and reviling Thee, “Come down from the cross and we
will believe that Thou art He.” Thou didst not come down, for again
Thou wouldst not enslave man by a miracle, and didst crave faith given
freely, not based on miracle. Thou didst crave for free love and not
the base raptures of the slave before the might that has overawed him
for ever. But Thou didst think too highly of men therein, for they are
slaves, of course, though rebellious by nature. Look round and judge;
fifteen centuries have passed, look upon them. Whom hast Thou raised up
to Thyself? I swear, man is weaker and baser by nature than Thou hast
believed him! Can he, can he do what Thou didst? By showing him so much
respect, Thou didst, as it were, cease to feel for him, for Thou didst
ask far too much from him—Thou who hast loved him more than Thyself!
Respecting him less, Thou wouldst have asked less of him. That would
have been more like love, for his burden would have been lighter. He is
weak and vile. What though he is everywhere now rebelling against our
power, and proud of his rebellion? It is the pride of a child and a
schoolboy. They are little children rioting and barring out the teacher
at school. But their childish delight will end; it will cost them dear.
They will cast down temples and drench the earth with blood. But they
will see at last, the foolish children, that, though they are rebels,
they are impotent rebels, unable to keep up their own rebellion. Bathed
in their foolish tears, they will recognize at last that He who created
them rebels must have meant to mock at them. They will say this in
despair, and their utterance will be a blasphemy which will make them
more unhappy still, for man’s nature cannot bear blasphemy, and in the
end always avenges it on itself. And so unrest, confusion and
unhappiness—that is the present lot of man after Thou didst bear so
much for their freedom! The great prophet tells in vision and in image,
that he saw all those who took part in the first resurrection and that
there were of each tribe twelve thousand. But if there were so many of
them, they must have been not men but gods. They had borne Thy cross,
they had endured scores of years in the barren, hungry wilderness,
living upon locusts and roots—and Thou mayest indeed point with pride
at those children of freedom, of free love, of free and splendid
sacrifice for Thy name. But remember that they were only some
thousands; and what of the rest? And how are the other weak ones to
blame, because they could not endure what the strong have endured? How
is the weak soul to blame that it is unable to receive such terrible
gifts? Canst Thou have simply come to the elect and for the elect? But
if so, it is a mystery and we cannot understand it. And if it is a
mystery, we too have a right to preach a mystery, and to teach them
that it’s not the free judgment of their hearts, not love that matters,
but a mystery which they must follow blindly, even against their
conscience. So we have done. We have corrected Thy work and have
founded it upon _miracle_, _mystery_ and _authority_. And men rejoiced
that they were again led like sheep, and that the terrible gift that
had brought them such suffering was, at last, lifted from their hearts.
Were we right teaching them this? Speak! Did we not love mankind, so
meekly acknowledging their feebleness, lovingly lightening their
burden, and permitting their weak nature even sin with our sanction?
Why hast Thou come now to hinder us? And why dost Thou look silently
and searchingly at me with Thy mild eyes? Be angry. I don’t want Thy
love, for I love Thee not. And what use is it for me to hide anything
from Thee? Don’t I know to Whom I am speaking? All that I can say is
known to Thee already. And is it for me to conceal from Thee our
mystery? Perhaps it is Thy will to hear it from my lips. Listen, then.
We are not working with Thee, but with _him_—that is our mystery. It’s
long—eight centuries—since we have been on _his_ side and not on Thine.
Just eight centuries ago, we took from him what Thou