

“You low harlot!”

Mitya flew at him at once, clutched him in both hands, lifted him in
the air, and in one instant had carried him into the room on the right,
from which they had just come.

“I’ve laid him on the floor, there,” he announced, returning at once,
gasping with excitement. “He’s struggling, the scoundrel! But he won’t
come back, no fear of that!...”

He closed one half of the folding doors, and holding the other ajar
called out to the little Pole:

“Most illustrious, will you be pleased to retire as well?”

“My dear Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” said Trifon Borissovitch, “make them
give you back the money you lost. It’s as good as stolen from you.”

“I don’t want my fifty roubles back,” Kalganov declared suddenly.

“I don’t want my two hundred, either,” cried Mitya, “I wouldn’t take it
for anything! Let him keep it as a consolation.”

“Bravo, Mitya! You’re a trump, Mitya!” cried Grushenka, and there was a
note of fierce anger in the exclamation.

The little _pan_, crimson with fury but still mindful of his dignity,
was making for the door, but he stopped short and said suddenly,
addressing Grushenka:

“_Pani_, if you want to come with me, come. If not, good-by.”

And swelling with indignation and importance he went to the door. This
was a man of character: he had so good an opinion of himself that after
all that had passed, he still expected that she would marry him. Mitya
slammed the door after him.

“Lock it,” said Kalganov. But the key clicked on the other side, they
had locked it from within.

“That’s capital!” exclaimed Grushenka relentlessly. “Serve them right!”




Chapter VIII.
Delirium


What followed was almost an orgy, a feast to which all were welcome.
Grushenka was the first to call for wine.

“I want to drink. I want to be quite drunk, as we were before. Do you
remember, Mitya, do you remember how we made friends here last time!”

Mitya himself was almost delirious, feeling that his happiness was at
hand. But Grushenka was continually sending him away from her.

“Go and enjoy yourself. Tell them to dance, to make merry, ‘let the
stove and cottage dance’; as we had it last time,” she kept exclaiming.
She was tremendously excited. And Mitya hastened to obey her. The
chorus were in the next room. The room in which they had been sitting
till that moment was too small, and was divided in two by cotton
curtains, behind which was a huge bed with a puffy feather mattress and
a pyramid of cotton pillows. In the four rooms for visitors there were
beds. Grushenka settled herself just at the door. Mitya set an easy
chair for her. She had sat in the same place to watch the dancing and
singing “the time before,” when they had made merry there. All the
girls who had come had been there then; the Jewish band with fiddles
and zithers had come, too, and at last the long expected cart had
arrived with the wines and provisions.

Mitya bustled about. All sorts of people began coming into the room to
look on, peasants and their women, who had been roused from sleep and
attracted by the hopes of another marvelous entertainment such as they
had enjoyed a month before. Mitya remembered their faces, greeting and
embracing every one he knew. He uncorked bottles and poured out wine
for every one who presented himself. Only the girls were very eager for
the champagne. The men preferred rum, brandy, and, above all, hot
punch. Mitya had chocolate made for all the girls, and ordered that
three samovars should be kept boiling all night to provide tea and
punch for everyone to help himself.

An absurd chaotic confusion followed, but Mitya was in his natural
element, and the more foolish it became, the more his spirits rose. If
the peasants had asked him for money at that moment, he would have
pulled out his notes and given them away right and left. This was
probably why the landlord, Trifon Borissovitch, kept hovering about
Mitya to protect him. He seemed to have given up all idea of going to
bed that night; but he drank little, only one glass of punch, and kept
a sharp look-out on Mitya’s interests after his own fashion. He
intervened in the nick of time, civilly and obsequiously persuading
Mitya not to give away “cigars and Rhine wine,” and, above all, money
to the peasants as he had done before. He was very indignant, too, at
the peasant girls drinking liqueur, and eating sweets.

“They’re a lousy lot, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,” he said. “I’d give them a
kick, every one of them, and they’d take it as an honor—that’s all
they’re worth!”

Mitya remembered Andrey again, and ordered punch to be sent out to him.
“I was rude to him just now,” he repeated with a sinking, softened
voice. Kalganov did not want to drink, and at first did not care for
the girls’ singing; but after he had drunk a couple of glasses of
champagne he became extraordinarily lively, strolling about the room,
laughing and praising the music and the songs, admiring every one and
everything. Maximov, blissfully drunk, never left his side. Grushenka,
too, was beginning to get drunk. Pointing to Kalganov, she said to
Mitya:

“What a dear, charming boy he is!”

And Mitya, delighted, ran to kiss Kalganov and Maximov. Oh, great were
his hopes! She had said nothing yet, and seemed, indeed, purposely to
refrain from speaking. But she looked at him from time to time with
caressing and passionate eyes. At last she suddenly gripped his hand
and drew him vigorously to her. She was sitting at the moment in the
low chair by the door.

“How was it you came just now, eh? Have you walked in!... I was
frightened. So you wanted to give me up to him, did you? Did you really
want to?”

“I didn’t want to spoil your happiness!” Mitya faltered blissfully. But
she did not need his answer.

“Well, go and enjoy yourself ...” she sent him away once more. “Don’t
cry, I’ll call you back again.”

He would run away, and she listened to the singing and looked at the
dancing, though her eyes followed him wherever he went. But in another
quarter of an hour she would call him once more and again he would run
back to her.

“Come, sit beside me, tell me, how did you hear about me, and my coming
here yesterday? From whom did you first hear it?”

And Mitya began telling her all about it, disconnectedly, incoherently,
feverishly. He spoke strangely, often frowning, and stopping abruptly.

“What are you frowning at?” she asked.

“Nothing.... I left a man ill there. I’d give ten years of my life for
him to get well, to know he was all right!”

“Well, never mind him, if he’s ill. So you meant to shoot yourself 
to-morrow! What a silly boy! What for? I like such reckless fellows as
you,” she lisped, with a rather halting tongue. “So you would go any
length for me, eh? Did you really mean to shoot yourself to-morrow, you
stupid? No, wait a little. To-morrow I may have something to say to
you.... I won’t say it to-day, but to-morrow. You’d like it to be
to-day? No, I don’t want to to-day. Come, go along now, go and amuse
yourself.”

Once, however, she called him, as it were, puzzled and uneasy.

“Why are you sad? I see you’re sad.... Yes, I see it,” she added,
looking intently into his eyes. “Though you keep kissing the peasants
and shouting, I see something. No, be merry. I’m merry; you be merry,
too.... I love somebody here. Guess who it is. Ah, look, my boy has
fallen asleep, poor dear, he’s drunk.”

She meant Kalganov. He was, in fact, drunk, and had dropped asleep for
a moment, sitting on the sofa. But he was not merely drowsy from drink;
he felt suddenly dejected, or, as he said, “bored.” He was intensely
depressed by the girls’ songs, which, as the drinking went on,
gradually became coarse and more reckless. And the dances were as bad.
Two girls dressed up as bears, and a lively girl, called Stepanida,
with a stick in her hand, acted the part of keeper, and began to “show
them.”

“Look alive, Marya, or you’ll get the stick!”

The bears rolled on the ground at last in the most unseemly fashion,
amid roars of laughter from the closely-packed crowd of men and women.

“Well, let them! Let them!” said Grushenka sententiously, with an
ecstatic expression on her face. “When they do get a day to enjoy
themselves, why shouldn’t folks be happy?”

Kalganov looked as though he had been besmirched with dirt.

“It’s swinish, all this peasant foolery,” he murmured, moving away;
“it’s the game they play when it’s light all night in summer.”

He particularly disliked one “new” song to a jaunty dance-tune. It
described how a gentleman came and tried his luck with the girls, to
see whether they would love him:

The master came to try the girls:
Would they love him, would they not?


But the girls could not love the master:

He would beat me cruelly
And such love won’t do for me.


Then a gypsy comes along and he, too, tries:

The gypsy came to try the girls:
Would they love him, would they not?


But they couldn’t love the gypsy either:

He would be a thief, I fear,
And would cause me many a tear.


And many more men come to try their luck, among them a soldier:

The soldier came to try the girls:
Would they love him, would they not?


But the soldier is rejected with contempt, in two indecent lines, sung
with absolute frankness and producing a furore in the audience. The
song ends with a merchant:

The merchant came to try the girls:
Would they love him, would they not?


And it appears that he wins their love because:

The merchant will make gold for me
And his queen I’ll gladly be.


Kalganov was positively indignant.

“That’s just a song of yesterday,” he said aloud. “Who writes such
things for them? They might just as well have had a railwayman or a Jew
come to try his luck with the girls; they’d have carried all before
them.”

And, almost as though it were a personal affront, he declared, on the
spot, that he was bored, sat down on the sofa and immediately fell
asleep. His pretty little face looked rather pale, as it fell back on
the sofa cushion.

“Look how pretty he is,” said Grushenka, taking Mitya up to him. “I was
combing his hair just now; his hair’s like flax, and so thick....”

And, bending over him tenderly, she kissed his forehead. Kalganov
instantly opened his eyes, looked at her, stood up, and with the most
anxious air inquired where was Maximov?

“So that’s who it is you want.” Grushenka laughed. “Stay with me a
minute. Mitya, run and find his Maximov.”

Maximov, it appeared, could not tear himself away from the girls, only
running away from time to time to pour himself out a glass of liqueur.
He had drunk two cups of chocolate. His face was red, and his nose was
crimson; his eyes were moist and mawkishly sweet. He ran up and
announced that he was going to dance the “sabotière.”

“They taught me all those well-bred, aristocratic dances when I was
little....”

“Go, go with him, Mitya, and I’ll watch from here how he dances,” said
Grushenka.

“No, no, I’m coming to look on, too,” exclaimed Kalganov, brushing
aside in the most naïve way Grushenka’s offer to sit with him. They all
went to look on. Maximov danced his dance. But it roused no great
admiration in any one but Mitya. It consisted of nothing but skipping
and hopping, kicking up the feet, and at every skip Maximov slapped the
upturned sole of his foot. Kalganov did not like it at all, but Mitya
kissed the dancer.

“Thanks. You’re tired perhaps? What are you looking for here? Would you
like some sweets? A cigar, perhaps?”

“A cigarette.”

“Don’t you want a drink?”

“I’ll just have a liqueur.... Have you any chocolates?”

“Yes, there’s a heap of them on the table there. Choose one, my dear
soul!”

“I like one with vanilla ... for old people. He he!”

“No, brother, we’ve none of that special sort.”

“I say,” the old man bent down to whisper in Mitya’s ear. “That girl
there, little Marya, he he! How would it be if you were to help me make
friends with her?”

“So that’s what you’re after! No, brother, that won’t do!”

“I’d do no harm to any one,” Maximov muttered disconsolately.

“Oh, all right, all right. They only come here to dance and sing, you
know, brother. But damn it all, wait a bit!... Eat and drink and be
merry, meanwhile. Don’t you want money?”

“Later on, perhaps,” smiled Maximov.

“All right, all right....”

Mitya’s head was burning. He went outside to the wooden balcony which
ran round the whole building on the inner side, overlooking the
courtyard. The fresh air revived him. He stood alone in a dark corner,
and suddenly clutched his head in both hands. His scattered thoughts
came together; his sensations blended into a whole and threw a sudden
light into his mind. A fearful and terrible light! “If I’m to shoot
myself, why not now?” passed through his mind. “Why not go for the
pistols, bring them here, and here, in this dark dirty corner, make an
end?” Almost a minute he stood, undecided. A few hours earlier, when he
had been dashing here, he was pursued by disgrace, by the theft he had
committed, and that blood, that blood!... But yet it was easier for him
then. Then everything was over: he had lost her, given her up. She was
gone, for him—oh, then his death sentence had been easier for him; at
least it had seemed necessary, inevitable, for what had he to stay on
earth for?

But now? Was it the same as then? Now one phantom, one terror at least
was at an end: that first, rightful lover, that fateful figure had
vanished, leaving no trace. The terrible phantom had turned into
something so small, so comic; it had been carried into the bedroom and
locked in. It would never return. She was ashamed, and from her eyes he
could see now whom she loved. Now he had everything to make life happy
... but he could not go on living, he could not; oh, damnation! “O God!
restore to life the man I knocked down at the fence! Let this fearful
cup pass from me! Lord, thou hast wrought miracles for such sinners as
me! But what, what if the old man’s alive? Oh, then the shame of the
other disgrace I would wipe away. I would restore the stolen money. I’d
give it back; I’d get it somehow.... No trace of that shame will remain
except in my heart for ever! But no, no; oh, impossible cowardly
dreams! Oh, damnation!”

Yet there was a ray of light and hope in his darkness. He jumped up and
ran back to the room—to her, to her, his queen for ever! Was not one
moment of her love worth all the rest of life, even in the agonies of
disgrace? This wild question clutched at his heart. “To her, to her
alone, to see her, to hear her, to think of nothing, to forget
everything, if only for that night, for an hour, for a moment!” Just as
he turned from the balcony into the passage, he came upon the landlord,
Trifon Borissovitch. He thought he looked gloomy and worried, and
fancied he had come to find him.

“What is it, Trifon Borissovitch? are you looking for me?”

“No, sir.” The landlord seemed disconcerted. “Why should I be looking
for you? Where have you been?”

“Why do you look so glum? You’re not angry, are you? Wait a bit, you
shall soon get to bed.... What’s the time?”

“It’ll be three o’clock. Past three, it must be.”

“We’ll leave off soon. We’ll leave off.”

“Don’t mention it; it doesn’t matter. Keep it up as long as you
like....”

“What’s the matter with him?” Mitya wondered for an instant, and he ran
back to the room where the girls were dancing. But she was not there.
She was not in the blue room either; there was no one but Kalganov
asleep on the sofa. Mitya peeped behind the curtain—she was there. She
was sitting in the corner, on a trunk. Bent forward, with her head and
arms on the bed close by, she was crying bitterly, doing her utmost to
stifle her sobs that she might not be heard. Seeing Mitya, she beckoned
him to her, and when he ran to her, she grasped his hand tightly.

“Mitya, Mitya, I loved him, you know. How I have loved him these five
years, all that time! Did I love him or only my own anger? No, him,
him! It’s a lie that it was my anger I loved and not him. Mitya, I was
only seventeen then; he was so kind to me, so merry; he used to sing to
me.... Or so it seemed to a silly girl like me.... And now, O Lord,
it’s not the same man. Even his face is not the same; he’s different
altogether. I shouldn’t have known him. I drove here with Timofey, and
all the way I was thinking how I should meet him, what I should say to
him, how we should look at one another. My soul was faint, and all of a
sudden it was just as though he had emptied a pail of