 perfectly polite, air. “You are angry with me
even for being able to catch cold, though it happened in a most natural
way. I was hurrying then to a diplomatic _soirée_ at the house of a
lady of high rank in Petersburg, who was aiming at influence in the
Ministry. Well, an evening suit, white tie, gloves, though I was God
knows where and had to fly through space to reach your earth.... Of
course, it took only an instant, but you know a ray of light from the
sun takes full eight minutes, and fancy in an evening suit and open
waistcoat. Spirits don’t freeze, but when one’s in fleshly form, well
... in brief, I didn’t think, and set off, and you know in those
ethereal spaces, in the water that is above the firmament, there’s such
a frost ... at least one can’t call it frost, you can fancy, 150
degrees below zero! You know the game the village girls play—they
invite the unwary to lick an ax in thirty degrees of frost, the tongue
instantly freezes to it and the dupe tears the skin off, so it bleeds.
But that’s only in 30 degrees, in 150 degrees I imagine it would be
enough to put your finger on the ax and it would be the end of it ...
if only there could be an ax there.”

“And can there be an ax there?” Ivan interrupted, carelessly and
disdainfully. He was exerting himself to the utmost not to believe in
the delusion and not to sink into complete insanity.

“An ax?” the guest interrupted in surprise.

“Yes, what would become of an ax there?” Ivan cried suddenly, with a
sort of savage and insistent obstinacy.

“What would become of an ax in space? _Quelle idée!_ If it were to fall
to any distance, it would begin, I think, flying round the earth
without knowing why, like a satellite. The astronomers would calculate
the rising and the setting of the ax, _Gatzuk_ would put it in his
calendar, that’s all.”

“You are stupid, awfully stupid,” said Ivan peevishly. “Fib more
cleverly or I won’t listen. You want to get the better of me by
realism, to convince me that you exist, but I don’t want to believe you
exist! I won’t believe it!”

“But I am not fibbing, it’s all the truth; the truth is unhappily
hardly ever amusing. I see you persist in expecting something big of
me, and perhaps something fine. That’s a great pity, for I only give
what I can—”

“Don’t talk philosophy, you ass!”

“Philosophy, indeed, when all my right side is numb and I am moaning
and groaning. I’ve tried all the medical faculty: they can diagnose
beautifully, they have the whole of your disease at their finger-tips,
but they’ve no idea how to cure you. There was an enthusiastic little
student here, ‘You may die,’ said he, ‘but you’ll know perfectly what
disease you are dying of!’ And then what a way they have sending people
to specialists! ‘We only diagnose,’ they say, ‘but go to such-and-such
a specialist, he’ll cure you.’ The old doctor who used to cure all
sorts of disease has completely disappeared, I assure you, now there
are only specialists and they all advertise in the newspapers. If
anything is wrong with your nose, they send you to Paris: there, they
say, is a European specialist who cures noses. If you go to Paris,
he’ll look at your nose; I can only cure your right nostril, he’ll tell
you, for I don’t cure the left nostril, that’s not my speciality, but
go to Vienna, there there’s a specialist who will cure your left
nostril. What are you to do? I fell back on popular remedies, a German
doctor advised me to rub myself with honey and salt in the bath-house.
Solely to get an extra bath I went, smeared myself all over and it did
me no good at all. In despair I wrote to Count Mattei in Milan. He sent
me a book and some drops, bless him, and, only fancy, Hoff’s malt
extract cured me! I bought it by accident, drank a bottle and a half of
it, and I was ready to dance, it took it away completely. I made up my
mind to write to the papers to thank him, I was prompted by a feeling
of gratitude, and only fancy, it led to no end of a bother: not a
single paper would take my letter. ‘It would be very reactionary,’ they
said, ‘no one will believe it. _Le diable n’existe point._ You’d better
remain anonymous,’ they advised me. What use is a letter of thanks if
it’s anonymous? I laughed with the men at the newspaper office; ‘It’s
reactionary to believe in God in our days,’ I said, ‘but I am the
devil, so I may be believed in.’ ‘We quite understand that,’ they said.
‘Who doesn’t believe in the devil? Yet it won’t do, it might injure our
reputation. As a joke, if you like.’ But I thought as a joke it
wouldn’t be very witty. So it wasn’t printed. And do you know, I have
felt sore about it to this day. My best feelings, gratitude, for
instance, are literally denied me simply from my social position.”

“Philosophical reflections again?” Ivan snarled malignantly.

“God preserve me from it, but one can’t help complaining sometimes. I
am a slandered man. You upbraid me every moment with being stupid. One
can see you are young. My dear fellow, intelligence isn’t the only
thing! I have naturally a kind and merry heart. ‘I also write
vaudevilles of all sorts.’ You seem to take me for Hlestakov grown old,
but my fate is a far more serious one. Before time was, by some decree
which I could never make out, I was pre-destined ‘to deny’ and yet I am
genuinely good-hearted and not at all inclined to negation. ‘No, you
must go and deny, without denial there’s no criticism and what would a
journal be without a column of criticism?’ Without criticism it would
be nothing but one ‘hosannah.’ But nothing but hosannah is not enough
for life, the hosannah must be tried in the crucible of doubt and so
on, in the same style. But I don’t meddle in that, I didn’t create it,
I am not answerable for it. Well, they’ve chosen their scapegoat,
they’ve made me write the column of criticism and so life was made
possible. We understand that comedy; I, for instance, simply ask for
annihilation. No, live, I am told, for there’d be nothing without you.
If everything in the universe were sensible, nothing would happen.
There would be no events without you, and there must be events. So
against the grain I serve to produce events and do what’s irrational
because I am commanded to. For all their indisputable intelligence, men
take this farce as something serious, and that is their tragedy. They
suffer, of course ... but then they live, they live a real life, not a
fantastic one, for suffering is life. Without suffering what would be
the pleasure of it? It would be transformed into an endless church
service; it would be holy, but tedious. But what about me? I suffer,
but still, I don’t live. I am x in an indeterminate equation. I am a
sort of phantom in life who has lost all beginning and end, and who has
even forgotten his own name. You are laughing— no, you are not
laughing, you are angry again. You are for ever angry, all you care
about is intelligence, but I repeat again that I would give away all
this super-stellar life, all the ranks and honors, simply to be
transformed into the soul of a merchant’s wife weighing eighteen stone
and set candles at God’s shrine.”

“Then even you don’t believe in God?” said Ivan, with a smile of
hatred.

“What can I say?—that is, if you are in earnest—”

“Is there a God or not?” Ivan cried with the same savage intensity.

“Ah, then you are in earnest! My dear fellow, upon my word I don’t
know. There! I’ve said it now!”

“You don’t know, but you see God? No, you are not some one apart, you
are myself, you are I and nothing more! You are rubbish, you are my
fancy!”

“Well, if you like, I have the same philosophy as you, that would be
true. _Je pense, donc je suis_, I know that for a fact; all the rest,
all these worlds, God and even Satan—all that is not proved, to my
mind. Does all that exist of itself, or is it only an emanation of
myself, a logical development of my ego which alone has existed for
ever: but I make haste to stop, for I believe you will be jumping up to
beat me directly.”

“You’d better tell me some anecdote!” said Ivan miserably.

“There is an anecdote precisely on our subject, or rather a legend, not
an anecdote. You reproach me with unbelief, you see, you say, yet you
don’t believe. But, my dear fellow, I am not the only one like that. We
are all in a muddle over there now and all through your science. Once
there used to be atoms, five senses, four elements, and then everything
hung together somehow. There were atoms in the ancient world even, but
since we’ve learned that you’ve discovered the chemical molecule and
protoplasm and the devil knows what, we had to lower our crest. There’s
a regular muddle, and, above all, superstition, scandal; there’s as
much scandal among us as among you, you know; a little more in fact,
and spying, indeed, for we have our secret police department where
private information is received. Well, this wild legend belongs to our
middle ages—not yours, but ours—and no one believes it even among us,
except the old ladies of eighteen stone, not your old ladies I mean,
but ours. We’ve everything you have, I am revealing one of our secrets
out of friendship for you; though it’s forbidden. This legend is about
Paradise. There was, they say, here on earth a thinker and philosopher.
He rejected everything, ‘laws, conscience, faith,’ and, above all, the
future life. He died; he expected to go straight to darkness and death
and he found a future life before him. He was astounded and indignant.
‘This is against my principles!’ he said. And he was punished for that
... that is, you must excuse me, I am just repeating what I heard
myself, it’s only a legend ... he was sentenced to walk a quadrillion
kilometers in the dark (we’ve adopted the metric system, you know) and
when he has finished that quadrillion, the gates of heaven would be
opened to him and he’ll be forgiven—”

“And what tortures have you in the other world besides the quadrillion
kilometers?” asked Ivan, with a strange eagerness.

“What tortures? Ah, don’t ask. In old days we had all sorts, but now
they have taken chiefly to moral punishments—‘the stings of conscience’
and all that nonsense. We got that, too, from you, from the softening
of your manners. And who’s the better for it? Only those who have got
no conscience, for how can they be tortured by conscience when they
have none? But decent people who have conscience and a sense of honor
suffer for it. Reforms, when the ground has not been prepared for them,
especially if they are institutions copied from abroad, do nothing but
mischief! The ancient fire was better. Well, this man, who was
condemned to the quadrillion kilometers, stood still, looked round and
lay down across the road. ‘I won’t go, I refuse on principle!’ Take the
soul of an enlightened Russian atheist and mix it with the soul of the
prophet Jonah, who sulked for three days and nights in the belly of the
whale, and you get the character of that thinker who lay across the
road.”

“What did he lie on there?”

“Well, I suppose there was something to lie on. You are not laughing?”

“Bravo!” cried Ivan, still with the same strange eagerness. Now he was
listening with an unexpected curiosity. “Well, is he lying there now?”

“That’s the point, that he isn’t. He lay there almost a thousand years
and then he got up and went on.”

“What an ass!” cried Ivan, laughing nervously and still seeming to be
pondering something intently. “Does it make any difference whether he
lies there for ever or walks the quadrillion kilometers? It would take
a billion years to walk it?”

“Much more than that. I haven’t got a pencil and paper or I could work
it out. But he got there long ago, and that’s where the story begins.”

“What, he got there? But how did he get the billion years to do it?”

“Why, you keep thinking of our present earth! But our present earth may
have been repeated a billion times. Why, it’s become extinct, been
frozen; cracked, broken to bits, disintegrated into its elements, again
‘the water above the firmament,’ then again a comet, again a sun, again
from the sun it becomes earth—and the same sequence may have been
repeated endlessly and exactly the same to every detail, most unseemly
and insufferably tedious—”

“Well, well, what happened when he arrived?”

“Why, the moment the gates of Paradise were open and he walked in,
before he had been there two seconds, by his watch (though to my
thinking his watch must have long dissolved into its elements on the
way), he cried out that those two seconds were worth walking not a
quadrillion kilometers but a quadrillion of quadrillions, raised to the
quadrillionth power! In fact, he sang ‘hosannah’ and overdid it so,
that some persons there of lofty ideas wouldn’t shake hands with him at
first—he’d become too rapidly reactionary, they said. The Russian
temperament. I repeat, it’s a legend. I give it for what it’s worth. So
that’s the sort of ideas we have on such subjects even now.”

“I’ve caught you!” Ivan cried, with an almost childish delight, as
though he had succeeded in remembering something at last. “That
anecdote about the quadrillion years, I made up myself! I was seventeen
then, I was at the high school. I made up that anecdote and told it to
a schoolfellow called Korovkin, it was at Moscow.... The anecdote is so
characteristic that I couldn’t have taken it from anywhere. I thought
I’d forgotten it ... but I’ve unconsciously recalled it—I recalled it
myself—it was not you telling it! Thousands of things are unconsciously
remembered like that even when people are being taken to execution ...
it’s come back to me in a dream. You are that dream! You are a dream,
not a living creature!”

“From the vehemence with which you deny my existence,” laughed the
gentleman, “I am convinced that you believe in me.”

“Not in the slightest! I haven’t a hundredth part of a grain of faith
in you!”

“But you have the thousandth of a grain. Homeopathic doses perhaps are
the strongest. Confess that you have faith even to the ten-thousandth
of a grain.”

“Not for one minute,” cried Ivan furiously. “But I should like to
believe in you,” he added strangely.

“Aha! There’s an admission! But I am good-natured. I’ll come to your
assistance again. Listen, it was I caught you, not you me. I told you
your anecdote you’d forgotten, on purpose, so as to destroy your faith
in me completely.”

“You are lying. The object of your visit is to convince me of your
existence!”

“Just so. But hesitation, suspense, conflict between belief and
disbelief—is sometimes such torture to a conscientious man, such as you
are, that it’s better to hang oneself at once. Knowing that you are
inclined to believe in me, I administered some disbelief by telling you
that anecdote. I lead you to belief and disbelief by turns, and I have
my motive in it. It’s the new method. As soon as you disbelieve in me
completely, you’ll begin assuring me to my face that I am not a dream
but a reality. I know you. Then I shall have attained my object, which
is an honorable one. I shall sow in you only a tiny grain of faith and
it will grow into an oak-tree—and such an oak-tree that, sitting on it,
you will long to enter the ranks of ‘the hermits in the wilderness and
the saintly women,’ for that is what you are secretly longing for.
You’ll dine on locusts, you’ll wander into the wilderness to save your
soul!”

“Then it’s for the salvation of my soul you are working, is it, you
scoundrel?”

“One must do a good work sometimes. How ill-humored you are!”

“Fool! did you ever tempt those holy men who ate locusts and prayed
seventeen years in the wilderness till they were overgrown with moss?”

“My dear fellow, I’ve done nothing else. One forgets the whole world
and all the worlds, and sticks to one such saint, because he is a very
precious diamond. One such soul, you know, is sometimes worth a whole
constellation. We have our system of reckoning, you know. The conquest
is priceless! And some of them, on my word, are not inferior to you in
culture, though you won’t believe it. They can contemplate such depths
of belief and disbelief at the same moment that sometimes it really
seems that they are within a hair’s-breadth of being ‘turned upside
down,’ as the actor Gorbunov says.”

“Well, did you get your nose pulled?”[8]

“My dear fellow,” observed the visitor sententiously, “it’s better to
get off with your nose pulled than without a nose at all. As an
afflicted marquis observed not long ago (he must have been treated by a
specialist) in confession to his spiritual father—a Jesuit. I was
present,