 the
two hundred roubles to Ilusha’s father, though he had so warmly
intended to do so the preceding evening. But again it was not miracles
he needed but only “the higher justice” which had been in his belief
outraged by the blow that had so suddenly and cruelly wounded his
heart. And what does it signify that this “justice” looked for by
Alyosha inevitably took the shape of miracles to be wrought immediately
by the ashes of his adored teacher? Why, every one in the monastery
cherished the same thought and the same hope, even those whose
intellects Alyosha revered, Father Païssy himself, for instance. And so
Alyosha, untroubled by doubts, clothed his dreams too in the same form
as all the rest. And a whole year of life in the monastery had formed
the habit of this expectation in his heart. But it was justice,
justice, he thirsted for, not simply miracles.

And now the man who should, he believed, have been exalted above every
one in the whole world, that man, instead of receiving the glory that
was his due, was suddenly degraded and dishonored! What for? Who had
judged him? Who could have decreed this? Those were the questions that
wrung his inexperienced and virginal heart. He could not endure without
mortification, without resentment even, that the holiest of holy men
should have been exposed to the jeering and spiteful mockery of the
frivolous crowd so inferior to him. Even had there been no miracles,
had there been nothing marvelous to justify his hopes, why this
indignity, why this humiliation, why this premature decay, “in excess
of nature,” as the spiteful monks said? Why this “sign from heaven,”
which they so triumphantly acclaimed in company with Father Ferapont,
and why did they believe they had gained the right to acclaim it? Where
is the finger of Providence? Why did Providence hide its face “at the
most critical moment” (so Alyosha thought it), as though voluntarily
submitting to the blind, dumb, pitiless laws of nature?

That was why Alyosha’s heart was bleeding, and, of course, as I have
said already, the sting of it all was that the man he loved above
everything on earth should be put to shame and humiliated! This
murmuring may have been shallow and unreasonable in my hero, but I
repeat again for the third time—and am prepared to admit that it might
be difficult to defend my feeling—I am glad that my hero showed himself
not too reasonable at that moment, for any man of sense will always
come back to reason in time, but, if love does not gain the upper hand
in a boy’s heart at such an exceptional moment, when will it? I will
not, however, omit to mention something strange, which came for a time
to the surface of Alyosha’s mind at this fatal and obscure moment. This
new something was the harassing impression left by the conversation
with Ivan, which now persistently haunted Alyosha’s mind. At this
moment it haunted him. Oh, it was not that something of the
fundamental, elemental, so to speak, faith of his soul had been shaken.
He loved his God and believed in Him steadfastly, though he was
suddenly murmuring against Him. Yet a vague but tormenting and evil
impression left by his conversation with Ivan the day before, suddenly
revived again now in his soul and seemed forcing its way to the surface
of his consciousness.

It had begun to get dusk when Rakitin, crossing the pine copse from the
hermitage to the monastery, suddenly noticed Alyosha, lying face
downwards on the ground under a tree, not moving and apparently asleep.
He went up and called him by his name.

“You here, Alexey? Can you have—” he began wondering but broke off. He
had meant to say, “Can you have come to this?”

Alyosha did not look at him, but from a slight movement Rakitin at once
saw that he heard and understood him.

“What’s the matter?” he went on; but the surprise in his face gradually
passed into a smile that became more and more ironical.

“I say, I’ve been looking for you for the last two hours. You suddenly
disappeared. What are you about? What foolery is this? You might just
look at me...”

Alyosha raised his head, sat up and leaned his back against the tree.
He was not crying, but there was a look of suffering and irritability
in his face. He did not look at Rakitin, however, but looked away to
one side of him.

“Do you know your face is quite changed? There’s none of your famous
mildness to be seen in it. Are you angry with some one? Have they been
ill-treating you?”

“Let me alone,” said Alyosha suddenly, with a weary gesture of his
hand, still looking away from him.

“Oho! So that’s how we are feeling! So you can shout at people like
other mortals. That is a come-down from the angels. I say, Alyosha, you
have surprised me, do you hear? I mean it. It’s long since I’ve been
surprised at anything here. I always took you for an educated man....”

Alyosha at last looked at him, but vaguely, as though scarcely
understanding what he said.

“Can you really be so upset simply because your old man has begun to
stink? You don’t mean to say you seriously believed that he was going
to work miracles?” exclaimed Rakitin, genuinely surprised again.

“I believed, I believe, I want to believe, and I will believe, what
more do you want?” cried Alyosha irritably.

“Nothing at all, my boy. Damn it all! why, no schoolboy of thirteen
believes in that now. But there.... So now you are in a temper with
your God, you are rebelling against Him; He hasn’t given promotion, He
hasn’t bestowed the order of merit! Eh, you are a set!”

Alyosha gazed a long while with his eyes half closed at Rakitin, and
there was a sudden gleam in his eyes ... but not of anger with Rakitin.

“I am not rebelling against my God; I simply ‘don’t accept His world.’” 
Alyosha suddenly smiled a forced smile.

“How do you mean, you don’t accept the world?” Rakitin thought a moment
over his answer. “What idiocy is this?”

Alyosha did not answer.

“Come, enough nonsense, now to business. Have you had anything to eat
to-day?”

“I don’t remember.... I think I have.”

“You need keeping up, to judge by your face. It makes one sorry to look
at you. You didn’t sleep all night either, I hear, you had a meeting in
there. And then all this bobbery afterwards. Most likely you’ve had
nothing to eat but a mouthful of holy bread. I’ve got some sausage in
my pocket; I’ve brought it from the town in case of need, only you
won’t eat sausage....”

“Give me some.”

“I say! You are going it! Why, it’s a regular mutiny, with barricades!
Well, my boy, we must make the most of it. Come to my place.... I
shouldn’t mind a drop of vodka myself, I am tired to death. Vodka is
going too far for you, I suppose ... or would you like some?”

“Give me some vodka too.”

“Hullo! You surprise me, brother!” Rakitin looked at him in amazement.
“Well, one way or another, vodka or sausage, this is a jolly fine
chance and mustn’t be missed. Come along.”

Alyosha got up in silence and followed Rakitin.

“If your little brother Ivan could see this—wouldn’t he be surprised!
By the way, your brother Ivan set off to Moscow this morning, did you
know?”

“Yes,” answered Alyosha listlessly, and suddenly the image of his
brother Dmitri rose before his mind. But only for a minute, and though
it reminded him of something that must not be put off for a moment,
some duty, some terrible obligation, even that reminder made no
impression on him, did not reach his heart and instantly faded out of
his mind and was forgotten. But, a long while afterwards, Alyosha
remembered this.

“Your brother Ivan declared once that I was a ‘liberal booby with no
talents whatsoever.’ Once you, too, could not resist letting me know I
was ‘dishonorable.’ Well! I should like to see what your talents and
sense of honor will do for you now.” This phrase Rakitin finished to
himself in a whisper.

“Listen!” he said aloud, “let’s go by the path beyond the monastery
straight to the town. Hm! I ought to go to Madame Hohlakov’s by the
way. Only fancy, I’ve written to tell her everything that happened, and
would you believe it, she answered me instantly in pencil (the lady has
a passion for writing notes) that ‘she would never have expected _such
conduct_ from a man of such a reverend character as Father Zossima.’
That was her very word: ‘conduct.’ She is angry too. Eh, you are a set!
Stay!” he cried suddenly again. He suddenly stopped and taking Alyosha
by the shoulder made him stop too.

“Do you know, Alyosha,” he peeped inquisitively into his eyes, absorbed
in a sudden new thought which had dawned on him, and though he was
laughing outwardly he was evidently afraid to utter that new idea
aloud, so difficult he still found it to believe in the strange and
unexpected mood in which he now saw Alyosha. “Alyosha, do you know
where we had better go?” he brought out at last timidly, and
insinuatingly.

“I don’t care ... where you like.”

“Let’s go to Grushenka, eh? Will you come?” pronounced Rakitin at last,
trembling with timid suspense.

“Let’s go to Grushenka,” Alyosha answered calmly, at once, and this
prompt and calm agreement was such a surprise to Rakitin that he almost
started back.

“Well! I say!” he cried in amazement, but seizing Alyosha firmly by the
arm he led him along the path, still dreading that he would change his
mind.

They walked along in silence, Rakitin was positively afraid to talk.

“And how glad she will be, how delighted!” he muttered, but lapsed into
silence again. And indeed it was not to please Grushenka he was taking
Alyosha to her. He was a practical person and never undertook anything
without a prospect of gain for himself. His object in this case was
twofold, first a revengeful desire to see “the downfall of the
righteous,” and Alyosha’s fall “from the saints to the sinners,” over
which he was already gloating in his imagination, and in the second
place he had in view a certain material gain for himself, of which more
will be said later.

“So the critical moment has come,” he thought to himself with spiteful
glee, “and we shall catch it on the hop, for it’s just what we want.”




Chapter III.
An Onion


Grushenka lived in the busiest part of the town, near the cathedral
square, in a small wooden lodge in the courtyard belonging to the house
of the widow Morozov. The house was a large stone building of two
stories, old and very ugly. The widow led a secluded life with her two
unmarried nieces, who were also elderly women. She had no need to let
her lodge, but every one knew that she had taken in Grushenka as a
lodger, four years before, solely to please her kinsman, the merchant
Samsonov, who was known to be the girl’s protector. It was said that
the jealous old man’s object in placing his “favorite” with the widow
Morozov was that the old woman should keep a sharp eye on her new
lodger’s conduct. But this sharp eye soon proved to be unnecessary, and
in the end the widow Morozov seldom met Grushenka and did not worry her
by looking after her in any way. It is true that four years had passed
since the old man had brought the slim, delicate, shy, timid, dreamy,
and sad girl of eighteen from the chief town of the province, and much
had happened since then. Little was known of the girl’s history in the
town and that little was vague. Nothing more had been learnt during the
last four years, even after many persons had become interested in the
beautiful young woman into whom Agrafena Alexandrovna had meanwhile
developed. There were rumors that she had been at seventeen betrayed by
some one, some sort of officer, and immediately afterwards abandoned by
him. The officer had gone away and afterwards married, while Grushenka
had been left in poverty and disgrace. It was said, however, that
though Grushenka had been raised from destitution by the old man,
Samsonov, she came of a respectable family belonging to the clerical
class, that she was the daughter of a deacon or something of the sort.

And now after four years the sensitive, injured and pathetic little
orphan had become a plump, rosy beauty of the Russian type, a woman of
bold and determined character, proud and insolent. She had a good head
for business, was acquisitive, saving and careful, and by fair means or
foul had succeeded, it was said, in amassing a little fortune. There
was only one point on which all were agreed. Grushenka was not easily
to be approached and except her aged protector there had not been one
man who could boast of her favors during those four years. It was a
positive fact, for there had been a good many, especially during the
last two years, who had attempted to obtain those favors. But all their
efforts had been in vain and some of these suitors had been forced to
beat an undignified and even comic retreat, owing to the firm and
ironical resistance they met from the strong-willed young person. It
was known, too, that the young person had, especially of late, been
given to what is called “speculation,” and that she had shown marked
abilities in that direction, so that many people began to say that she
was no better than a Jew. It was not that she lent money on interest,
but it was known, for instance, that she had for some time past, in
partnership with old Karamazov, actually invested in the purchase of
bad debts for a trifle, a tenth of their nominal value, and afterwards
had made out of them ten times their value.

The old widower Samsonov, a man of large fortune, was stingy and
merciless. He tyrannized over his grown-up sons, but, for the last year
during which he had been ill and lost the use of his swollen legs, he
had fallen greatly under the influence of his protégée, whom he had at
first kept strictly and in humble surroundings, “on Lenten fare,” as
the wits said at the time. But Grushenka had succeeded in emancipating
herself, while she established in him a boundless belief in her
fidelity. The old man, now long since dead, had had a large business in
his day and was also a noteworthy character, miserly and hard as flint.
Though Grushenka’s hold upon him was so strong that he could not live
without her (it had been so especially for the last two years), he did
not settle any considerable fortune on her and would not have been
moved to do so, if she had threatened to leave him. But he had
presented her with a small sum, and even that was a surprise to every
one when it became known.

“You are a wench with brains,” he said to her, when he gave her eight
thousand roubles, “and you must look after yourself, but let me tell
you that except your yearly allowance as before, you’ll get nothing
more from me to the day of my death, and I’ll leave you nothing in my
will either.”

And he kept his word; he died and left everything to his sons, whom,
with their wives and children, he had treated all his life as servants.
Grushenka was not even mentioned in his will. All this became known
afterwards. He helped Grushenka with his advice to increase her capital
and put business in her way.

When Fyodor Pavlovitch, who first came into contact with Grushenka over
a piece of speculation, ended to his own surprise by falling madly in
love with her, old Samsonov, gravely ill as he was, was immensely
amused. It is remarkable that throughout their whole acquaintance
Grushenka was absolutely and spontaneously open with the old man, and
he seems to have been the only person in the world with whom she was
so. Of late, when Dmitri too had come on the scene with his love, the
old man left off laughing. On the contrary, he once gave Grushenka a
stern and earnest piece of advice.

“If you have to choose between the two, father or son, you’d better
choose the old man, if only you make sure the old scoundrel will marry
you and settle some fortune on you beforehand. But don’t keep on with
the captain, you’ll get no good out of that.”

These were the very words of the old profligate, who felt already that
his death was not far off and who actually died five months later.

I will note, too, in passing, that although many in our town knew of
the grotesque and monstrous rivalry of the Karamazovs, father and son,
the object of which was Grushenka, scarcely any one understood what
really underlay her attitude to both of them. Even Grushenka’s two
servants (after the catastrophe of which we will speak later) testified
in court that she received Dmitri Fyodorovitch simply from fear because
“he threatened to murder her.” These servants were an old cook,
invalidish and almost deaf, who came from Grushenka’s old home, and her
granddaughter, a smart young girl of twenty, who performed the duties
of a maid. Grushenka lived very economically and her surroundings were
anything but luxurious. Her lodge consisted of three rooms furnished
with mahogany furniture in the fashion of 1820, belonging to her
landlady.