 morbid
impulse that possessed him.

But apart from temporary aberration, the doctor diagnosed mania, which
premised, in his words, to lead to complete insanity in the future. (It
must be noted that I report this in my own words, the doctor made use
of very learned and professional language.) “All his actions are in
contravention of common sense and logic,” he continued. “Not to refer
to what I have not seen, that is, the crime itself and the whole
catastrophe, the day before yesterday, while he was talking to me, he
had an unaccountably fixed look in his eye. He laughed unexpectedly
when there was nothing to laugh at. He showed continual and
inexplicable irritability, using strange words, ‘Bernard!’ ‘Ethics!’
and others equally inappropriate.” But the doctor detected mania, above
all, in the fact that the prisoner could not even speak of the three
thousand roubles, of which he considered himself to have been cheated,
without extraordinary irritation, though he could speak comparatively
lightly of other misfortunes and grievances. According to all accounts,
he had even in the past, whenever the subject of the three thousand
roubles was touched on, flown into a perfect frenzy, and yet he was
reported to be a disinterested and not grasping man.

“As to the opinion of my learned colleague,” the Moscow doctor added
ironically in conclusion, “that the prisoner would, on entering the
court, have naturally looked at the ladies and not straight before him,
I will only say that, apart from the playfulness of this theory, it is
radically unsound. For though I fully agree that the prisoner, on
entering the court where his fate will be decided, would not naturally
look straight before him in that fixed way, and that that may really be
a sign of his abnormal mental condition, at the same time I maintain
that he would naturally not look to the left at the ladies, but, on the
contrary, to the right to find his legal adviser, on whose help all his
hopes rest and on whose defense all his future depends.” The doctor
expressed his opinion positively and emphatically.

But the unexpected pronouncement of Doctor Varvinsky gave the last
touch of comedy to the difference of opinion between the experts. In
his opinion the prisoner was now, and had been all along, in a
perfectly normal condition, and, although he certainly must have been
in a nervous and exceedingly excited state before his arrest, this
might have been due to several perfectly obvious causes, jealousy,
anger, continual drunkenness, and so on. But this nervous condition
would not involve the mental aberration of which mention had just been
made. As to the question whether the prisoner should have looked to the
left or to the right on entering the court, “in his modest opinion,”
the prisoner would naturally look straight before him on entering the
court, as he had in fact done, as that was where the judges, on whom
his fate depended, were sitting. So that it was just by looking
straight before him that he showed his perfectly normal state of mind
at the present. The young doctor concluded his “modest” testimony with
some heat.

“Bravo, doctor!” cried Mitya, from his seat, “just so!”

Mitya, of course, was checked, but the young doctor’s opinion had a
decisive influence on the judges and on the public, and, as appeared
afterwards, every one agreed with him. But Doctor Herzenstube, when
called as a witness, was quite unexpectedly of use to Mitya. As an old
resident in the town who had known the Karamazov family for years, he
furnished some facts of great value for the prosecution, and suddenly,
as though recalling something, he added:

“But the poor young man might have had a very different life, for he
had a good heart both in childhood and after childhood, that I know.
But the Russian proverb says, ‘If a man has one head, it’s good, but if
another clever man comes to visit him, it would be better still, for
then there will be two heads and not only one.’”

“One head is good, but two are better,” the prosecutor put in
impatiently. He knew the old man’s habit of talking slowly and
deliberately, regardless of the impression he was making and of the
delay he was causing, and highly prizing his flat, dull and always
gleefully complacent German wit. The old man was fond of making jokes.

“Oh, yes, that’s what I say,” he went on stubbornly. “One head is good,
but two are much better, but he did not meet another head with wits,
and his wits went. Where did they go? I’ve forgotten the word.” He went
on, passing his hand before his eyes, “Oh, yes, _spazieren_.”

“Wandering?”

“Oh, yes, wandering, that’s what I say. Well, his wits went wandering
and fell in such a deep hole that he lost himself. And yet he was a
grateful and sensitive boy. Oh, I remember him very well, a little chap
so high, left neglected by his father in the back yard, when he ran
about without boots on his feet, and his little breeches hanging by one
button.”

A note of feeling and tenderness suddenly came into the honest old
man’s voice. Fetyukovitch positively started, as though scenting
something, and caught at it instantly.

“Oh, yes, I was a young man then.... I was ... well, I was forty-five
then, and had only just come here. And I was so sorry for the boy then;
I asked myself why shouldn’t I buy him a pound of ... a pound of what?
I’ve forgotten what it’s called. A pound of what children are very fond
of, what is it, what is it?” The doctor began waving his hands again.
“It grows on a tree and is gathered and given to every one....”

“Apples?”

“Oh, no, no. You have a dozen of apples, not a pound.... No, there are
a lot of them, and all little. You put them in the mouth and crack.”

“Nuts?”

“Quite so, nuts, I say so.” The doctor repeated in the calmest way as
though he had been at no loss for a word. “And I bought him a pound of
nuts, for no one had ever bought the boy a pound of nuts before. And I
lifted my finger and said to him, ‘Boy, _Gott der Vater_.’ He laughed
and said, ‘_Gott der Vater_.’... ‘_Gott der Sohn_.’ He laughed again
and lisped, ‘_Gott der Sohn_.’ ‘_Gott der heilige Geist_.’ Then he
laughed and said as best he could, ‘_Gott der heilige Geist_.’ I went
away, and two days after I happened to be passing, and he shouted to me
of himself, ‘Uncle, _Gott der Vater, Gott der Sohn_,’ and he had only
forgotten ‘_Gott der heilige Geist_.’ But I reminded him of it and I
felt very sorry for him again. But he was taken away, and I did not see
him again. Twenty-three years passed. I am sitting one morning in my
study, a white-haired old man, when there walks into the room a
blooming young man, whom I should never have recognized, but he held up
his finger and said, laughing, ‘_Gott der Vater, Gott der Sohn_, and
_Gott der heilige Geist_. I have just arrived and have come to thank
you for that pound of nuts, for no one else ever bought me a pound of
nuts; you are the only one that ever did.’ And then I remembered my
happy youth and the poor child in the yard, without boots on his feet,
and my heart was touched and I said, ‘You are a grateful young man, for
you have remembered all your life the pound of nuts I bought you in
your childhood.’ And I embraced him and blessed him. And I shed tears.
He laughed, but he shed tears, too ... for the Russian often laughs
when he ought to be weeping. But he did weep; I saw it. And now,
alas!...”

“And I am weeping now, German, I am weeping now, too, you saintly man,”
Mitya cried suddenly.

In any case the anecdote made a certain favorable impression on the
public. But the chief sensation in Mitya’s favor was created by the
evidence of Katerina Ivanovna, which I will describe directly. Indeed,
when the witnesses _à décharge_, that is, called by the defense, began
giving evidence, fortune seemed all at once markedly more favorable to
Mitya, and what was particularly striking, this was a surprise even to
the counsel for the defense. But before Katerina Ivanovna was called,
Alyosha was examined, and he recalled a fact which seemed to furnish
positive evidence against one important point made by the prosecution.




Chapter IV.
Fortune Smiles On Mitya


It came quite as a surprise even to Alyosha himself. He was not
required to take the oath, and I remember that both sides addressed him
very gently and sympathetically. It was evident that his reputation for
goodness had preceded him. Alyosha gave his evidence modestly and with
restraint, but his warm sympathy for his unhappy brother was
unmistakable. In answer to one question, he sketched his brother’s
character as that of a man, violent-tempered perhaps and carried away
by his passions, but at the same time honorable, proud and generous,
capable of self-sacrifice, if necessary. He admitted, however, that,
through his passion for Grushenka and his rivalry with his father, his
brother had been of late in an intolerable position. But he repelled
with indignation the suggestion that his brother might have committed a
murder for the sake of gain, though he recognized that the three
thousand roubles had become almost an obsession with Mitya; that he
looked upon them as part of the inheritance he had been cheated of by
his father, and that, indifferent as he was to money as a rule, he
could not even speak of that three thousand without fury. As for the
rivalry of the two “ladies,” as the prosecutor expressed it—that is, of
Grushenka and Katya—he answered evasively and was even unwilling to
answer one or two questions altogether.

“Did your brother tell you, anyway, that he intended to kill your
father?” asked the prosecutor. “You can refuse to answer if you think
necessary,” he added.

“He did not tell me so directly,” answered Alyosha.

“How so? Did he indirectly?”

“He spoke to me once of his hatred for our father and his fear that at
an extreme moment ... at a moment of fury, he might perhaps murder
him.”

“And you believed him?”

“I am afraid to say that I did. But I never doubted that some higher
feeling would always save him at the fatal moment, as it has indeed
saved him, for it was not he killed my father,” Alyosha said firmly, in
a loud voice that was heard throughout the court.

The prosecutor started like a war-horse at the sound of a trumpet.

“Let me assure you that I fully believe in the complete sincerity of
your conviction and do not explain it by or identify it with your
affection for your unhappy brother. Your peculiar view of the whole
tragic episode is known to us already from the preliminary
investigation. I won’t attempt to conceal from you that it is highly
individual and contradicts all the other evidence collected by the
prosecution. And so I think it essential to press you to tell me what
facts have led you to this conviction of your brother’s innocence and
of the guilt of another person against whom you gave evidence at the
preliminary inquiry?”

“I only answered the questions asked me at the preliminary inquiry,”
replied Alyosha, slowly and calmly. “I made no accusation against
Smerdyakov of myself.”

“Yet you gave evidence against him?”

“I was led to do so by my brother Dmitri’s words. I was told what took
place at his arrest and how he had pointed to Smerdyakov before I was
examined. I believe absolutely that my brother is innocent, and if he
didn’t commit the murder, then—”

“Then Smerdyakov? Why Smerdyakov? And why are you so completely
persuaded of your brother’s innocence?”

“I cannot help believing my brother. I know he wouldn’t lie to me. I
saw from his face he wasn’t lying.”

“Only from his face? Is that all the proof you have?”

“I have no other proof.”

“And of Smerdyakov’s guilt you have no proof whatever but your
brother’s word and the expression of his face?”

“No, I have no other proof.”

The prosecutor dropped the examination at this point. The impression
left by Alyosha’s evidence on the public was most disappointing. There
had been talk about Smerdyakov before the trial; some one had heard
something, some one had pointed out something else, it was said that
Alyosha had gathered together some extraordinary proofs of his
brother’s innocence and Smerdyakov’s guilt, and after all there was
nothing, no evidence except certain moral convictions so natural in a
brother.

But Fetyukovitch began his cross-examination. On his asking Alyosha
when it was that the prisoner had told him of his hatred for his father
and that he might kill him, and whether he had heard it, for instance,
at their last meeting before the catastrophe, Alyosha started as he
answered, as though only just recollecting and understanding something.

“I remember one circumstance now which I’d quite forgotten myself. It
wasn’t clear to me at the time, but now—”

And, obviously only now for the first time struck by an idea, he
recounted eagerly how, at his last interview with Mitya that evening
under the tree, on the road to the monastery, Mitya had struck himself
on the breast, “the upper part of the breast,” and had repeated several
times that he had a means of regaining his honor, that that means was
here, here on his breast. “I thought, when he struck himself on the
breast, he meant that it was in his heart,” Alyosha continued, “that he
might find in his heart strength to save himself from some awful
disgrace which was awaiting him and which he did not dare confess even
to me. I must confess I did think at the time that he was speaking of
our father, and that the disgrace he was shuddering at was the thought
of going to our father and doing some violence to him. Yet it was just
then that he pointed to something on his breast, so that I remember the
idea struck me at the time that the heart is not on that part of the
breast, but below, and that he struck himself much too high, just below
the neck, and kept pointing to that place. My idea seemed silly to me
at the time, but he was perhaps pointing then to that little bag in
which he had fifteen hundred roubles!”

“Just so,” Mitya cried from his place. “That’s right, Alyosha, it was
the little bag I struck with my fist.”

Fetyukovitch flew to him in hot haste entreating him to keep quiet, and
at the same instant pounced on Alyosha. Alyosha, carried away himself
by his recollection, warmly expressed his theory that this disgrace was
probably just that fifteen hundred roubles on him, which he might have
returned to Katerina Ivanovna as half of what he owed her, but which he
had yet determined not to repay her and to use for another
purpose—namely, to enable him to elope with Grushenka, if she
consented.

“It is so, it must be so,” exclaimed Alyosha, in sudden excitement. “My
brother cried several times that half of the disgrace, half of it (he
said _half_ several times) he could free himself from at once, but that
he was so unhappy in his weakness of will that he wouldn’t do it ...
that he knew beforehand he was incapable of doing it!”

“And you clearly, confidently remember that he struck himself just on
this part of the breast?” Fetyukovitch asked eagerly.

“Clearly and confidently, for I thought at the time, ‘Why does he
strike himself up there when the heart is lower down?’ and the thought
seemed stupid to me at the time ... I remember its seeming stupid ...
it flashed through my mind. That’s what brought it back to me just now.
How could I have forgotten it till now? It was that little bag he meant
when he said he had the means but wouldn’t give back that fifteen
hundred. And when he was arrested at Mokroe he cried out—I know, I was
told it—that he considered it the most disgraceful act of his life that
when he had the means of repaying Katerina Ivanovna half (half, note!)
what he owed her, he yet could not bring himself to repay the money and
preferred to remain a thief in her eyes rather than part with it. And
what torture, what torture that debt has been to him!” Alyosha
exclaimed in conclusion.

The prosecutor, of course, intervened. He asked Alyosha to describe
once more how it had all happened, and several times insisted on the
question, “Had the prisoner seemed to point to anything? Perhaps he had
simply struck himself with his fist on the breast?”

“But it was not with his fist,” cried Alyosha; “he pointed with his
fingers and pointed here, very high up.... How could I have so
completely forgotten it till this moment?”

The President asked Mitya what he had to say to the last witness’s
evidence. Mitya confirmed it, saying that he had been pointing to the
fifteen hundred roubles which were on his breast, just below the neck,
and that that was, of course, the disgrace, “A disgrace I cannot deny,
the most shameful act of my whole life,” cried Mitya. “I might have
repaid it and didn’t repay it. I preferred to remain a thief in her
eyes rather than give it back. And the most shameful part of it was
that I knew beforehand