 perfectly composed,
but looking at the floor.

“Allow me then to repeat my question,” Nikolay Parfenovitch went on as
though creeping up to the subject. “Where were you able to procure such
a sum all at once, when by your own confession, at five o’clock the
same day you—”

“I was in want of ten roubles and pledged my pistols with Perhotin, and
then went to Madame Hohlakov to borrow three thousand which she
wouldn’t give me, and so on, and all the rest of it,” Mitya interrupted
sharply. “Yes, gentlemen, I was in want of it, and suddenly thousands
turned up, eh? Do you know, gentlemen, you’re both afraid now ‘what if
he won’t tell us where he got it?’ That’s just how it is. I’m not going
to tell you, gentlemen. You’ve guessed right. You’ll never know,” said
Mitya, chipping out each word with extraordinary determination. The
lawyers were silent for a moment.

“You must understand, Mr. Karamazov, that it is of vital importance for
us to know,” said Nikolay Parfenovitch, softly and suavely.

“I understand; but still I won’t tell you.”

The prosecutor, too, intervened, and again reminded the prisoner that
he was at liberty to refuse to answer questions, if he thought it to
his interest, and so on. But in view of the damage he might do himself
by his silence, especially in a case of such importance as—

“And so on, gentlemen, and so on. Enough! I’ve heard that rigmarole
before,” Mitya interrupted again. “I can see for myself how important
it is, and that this is the vital point, and still I won’t say.”

“What is it to us? It’s not our business, but yours. You are doing
yourself harm,” observed Nikolay Parfenovitch nervously.

“You see, gentlemen, joking apart”—Mitya lifted his eyes and looked
firmly at them both—“I had an inkling from the first that we should
come to loggerheads at this point. But at first when I began to give my
evidence, it was all still far away and misty; it was all floating, and
I was so simple that I began with the supposition of mutual confidence
existing between us. Now I can see for myself that such confidence is
out of the question, for in any case we were bound to come to this
cursed stumbling-block. And now we’ve come to it! It’s impossible and
there’s an end of it! But I don’t blame you. You can’t believe it all
simply on my word. I understand that, of course.”

He relapsed into gloomy silence.

“Couldn’t you, without abandoning your resolution to be silent about
the chief point, could you not, at the same time, give us some slight
hint as to the nature of the motives which are strong enough to induce
you to refuse to answer, at a crisis so full of danger to you?”

Mitya smiled mournfully, almost dreamily.

“I’m much more good-natured than you think, gentlemen. I’ll tell you
the reason why and give you that hint, though you don’t deserve it. I
won’t speak of that, gentlemen, because it would be a stain on my
honor. The answer to the question where I got the money would expose me
to far greater disgrace than the murder and robbing of my father, if I
had murdered and robbed him. That’s why I can’t tell you. I can’t for
fear of disgrace. What, gentlemen, are you going to write that down?”

“Yes, we’ll write it down,” lisped Nikolay Parfenovitch.

“You ought not to write that down about ‘disgrace.’ I only told you
that in the goodness of my heart. I needn’t have told you. I made you a
present of it, so to speak, and you pounce upon it at once. Oh, well,
write—write what you like,” he concluded, with scornful disgust. “I’m
not afraid of you and I can still hold up my head before you.”

“And can’t you tell us the nature of that disgrace?” Nikolay
Parfenovitch hazarded.

The prosecutor frowned darkly.

“No, no, _c’est fini_, don’t trouble yourselves. It’s not worth while
soiling one’s hands. I have soiled myself enough through you as it is.
You’re not worth it—no one is ... Enough, gentlemen. I’m not going on.”

This was said too peremptorily. Nikolay Parfenovitch did not insist
further, but from Ippolit Kirillovitch’s eyes he saw that he had not
given up hope.

“Can you not, at least, tell us what sum you had in your hands when you
went into Mr. Perhotin’s—how many roubles exactly?”

“I can’t tell you that.”

“You spoke to Mr. Perhotin, I believe, of having received three
thousand from Madame Hohlakov.”

“Perhaps I did. Enough, gentlemen. I won’t say how much I had.”

“Will you be so good then as to tell us how you came here and what you
have done since you arrived?”

“Oh! you might ask the people here about that. But I’ll tell you if you
like.”

He proceeded to do so, but we won’t repeat his story. He told it dryly
and curtly. Of the raptures of his love he said nothing, but told them
that he abandoned his determination to shoot himself, owing to “new
factors in the case.” He told the story without going into motives or
details. And this time the lawyers did not worry him much. It was
obvious that there was no essential point of interest to them here.

“We shall verify all that. We will come back to it during the
examination of the witnesses, which will, of course, take place in your
presence,” said Nikolay Parfenovitch in conclusion. “And now allow me
to request you to lay on the table everything in your possession,
especially all the money you still have about you.”

“My money, gentlemen? Certainly. I understand that that is necessary.
I’m surprised, indeed, that you haven’t inquired about it before. It’s
true I couldn’t get away anywhere. I’m sitting here where I can be
seen. But here’s my money—count it—take it. That’s all, I think.”

He turned it all out of his pockets; even the small change—two pieces
of twenty copecks—he pulled out of his waistcoat pocket. They counted
the money, which amounted to eight hundred and thirty-six roubles, and
forty copecks.

“And is that all?” asked the investigating lawyer.

“Yes.”

“You stated just now in your evidence that you spent three hundred
roubles at Plotnikovs’. You gave Perhotin ten, your driver twenty, here
you lost two hundred, then....”

Nikolay Parfenovitch reckoned it all up. Mitya helped him readily. They
recollected every farthing and included it in the reckoning. Nikolay
Parfenovitch hurriedly added up the total.

“With this eight hundred you must have had about fifteen hundred at
first?”

“I suppose so,” snapped Mitya.

“How is it they all assert there was much more?”

“Let them assert it.”

“But you asserted it yourself.”

“Yes, I did, too.”

“We will compare all this with the evidence of other persons not yet
examined. Don’t be anxious about your money. It will be properly taken
care of and be at your disposal at the conclusion of ... what is
beginning ... if it appears, or, so to speak, is proved that you have
undisputed right to it. Well, and now....”

Nikolay Parfenovitch suddenly got up, and informed Mitya firmly that it
was his duty and obligation to conduct a minute and thorough search “of
your clothes and everything else....”

“By all means, gentlemen. I’ll turn out all my pockets, if you like.”

And he did, in fact, begin turning out his pockets.

“It will be necessary to take off your clothes, too.”

“What! Undress? Ugh! Damn it! Won’t you search me as I am! Can’t you?”

“It’s utterly impossible, Dmitri Fyodorovitch. You must take off your
clothes.”

“As you like,” Mitya submitted gloomily; “only, please, not here, but
behind the curtains. Who will search them?”

“Behind the curtains, of course.”

Nikolay Parfenovitch bent his head in assent. His small face wore an
expression of peculiar solemnity.




Chapter VI.
The Prosecutor Catches Mitya


Something utterly unexpected and amazing to Mitya followed. He could
never, even a minute before, have conceived that any one could behave
like that to him, Mitya Karamazov. What was worst of all, there was
something humiliating in it, and on their side something “supercilious
and scornful.” It was nothing to take off his coat, but he was asked to
undress further, or rather not asked but “commanded,” he quite
understood that. From pride and contempt he submitted without a word.
Several peasants accompanied the lawyers and remained on the same side
of the curtain. “To be ready if force is required,” thought Mitya, “and
perhaps for some other reason, too.”

“Well, must I take off my shirt, too?” he asked sharply, but Nikolay
Parfenovitch did not answer. He was busily engaged with the prosecutor
in examining the coat, the trousers, the waistcoat and the cap; and it
was evident that they were both much interested in the scrutiny. “They
make no bones about it,” thought Mitya, “they don’t keep up the most
elementary politeness.”

“I ask you for the second time—need I take off my shirt or not?” he
said, still more sharply and irritably.

“Don’t trouble yourself. We will tell you what to do,” Nikolay
Parfenovitch said, and his voice was positively peremptory, or so it
seemed to Mitya.

Meantime a consultation was going on in undertones between the lawyers.
There turned out to be on the coat, especially on the left side at the
back, a huge patch of blood, dry, and still stiff. There were
bloodstains on the trousers, too. Nikolay Parfenovitch, moreover, in
the presence of the peasant witnesses, passed his fingers along the
collar, the cuffs, and all the seams of the coat and trousers,
obviously looking for something—money, of course. He didn’t even hide
from Mitya his suspicion that he was capable of sewing money up in his
clothes.

“He treats me not as an officer but as a thief,” Mitya muttered to
himself. They communicated their ideas to one another with amazing
frankness. The secretary, for instance, who was also behind the
curtain, fussing about and listening, called Nikolay Parfenovitch’s
attention to the cap, which they were also fingering.

“You remember Gridyenko, the copying-clerk,” observed the secretary.
“Last summer he received the wages of the whole office, and pretended
to have lost the money when he was drunk. And where was it found? Why,
in just such pipings in his cap. The hundred-rouble notes were screwed
up in little rolls and sewed in the piping.”

Both the lawyers remembered Gridyenko’s case perfectly, and so laid
aside Mitya’s cap, and decided that all his clothes must be more
thoroughly examined later.

“Excuse me,” cried Nikolay Parfenovitch, suddenly, noticing that the
right cuff of Mitya’s shirt was turned in, and covered with blood,
“excuse me, what’s that, blood?”

“Yes,” Mitya jerked out.

“That is, what blood? ... and why is the cuff turned in?”

Mitya told him how he had got the sleeve stained with blood looking
after Grigory, and had turned it inside when he was washing his hands
at Perhotin’s.

“You must take off your shirt, too. That’s very important as material
evidence.”

Mitya flushed red and flew into a rage.

“What, am I to stay naked?” he shouted.

“Don’t disturb yourself. We will arrange something. And meanwhile take
off your socks.”

“You’re not joking? Is that really necessary?” Mitya’s eyes flashed.

“We are in no mood for joking,” answered Nikolay Parfenovitch sternly.

“Well, if I must—” muttered Mitya, and sitting down on the bed, he took
off his socks. He felt unbearably awkward. All were clothed, while he
was naked, and strange to say, when he was undressed he felt somehow
guilty in their presence, and was almost ready to believe himself that
he was inferior to them, and that now they had a perfect right to
despise him.

“When all are undressed, one is somehow not ashamed, but when one’s the
only one undressed and everybody is looking, it’s degrading,” he kept
repeating to himself, again and again. “It’s like a dream, I’ve
sometimes dreamed of being in such degrading positions.” It was a
misery to him to take off his socks. They were very dirty, and so were
his underclothes, and now every one could see it. And what was worse,
he disliked his feet. All his life he had thought both his big toes
hideous. He particularly loathed the coarse, flat, crooked nail on the
right one, and now they would all see it. Feeling intolerably ashamed
made him, at once and intentionally, rougher. He pulled off his shirt,
himself.

“Would you like to look anywhere else if you’re not ashamed to?”

“No, there’s no need to, at present.”

“Well, am I to stay naked like this?” he added savagely.

“Yes, that can’t be helped for the time.... Kindly sit down here for a
while. You can wrap yourself in a quilt from the bed, and I ... I’ll
see to all this.”

All the things were shown to the witnesses. The report of the search
was drawn up, and at last Nikolay Parfenovitch went out, and the
clothes were carried out after him. Ippolit Kirillovitch went out, too.
Mitya was left alone with the peasants, who stood in silence, never
taking their eyes off him. Mitya wrapped himself up in the quilt. He
felt cold. His bare feet stuck out, and he couldn’t pull the quilt over
so as to cover them. Nikolay Parfenovitch seemed to be gone a long
time, “an insufferable time.” “He thinks of me as a puppy,” thought
Mitya, gnashing his teeth. “That rotten prosecutor has gone, too,
contemptuous no doubt, it disgusts him to see me naked!”

Mitya imagined, however, that his clothes would be examined and
returned to him. But what was his indignation when Nikolay Parfenovitch
came back with quite different clothes, brought in behind him by a
peasant.

“Here are clothes for you,” he observed airily, seeming well satisfied
with the success of his mission. “Mr. Kalganov has kindly provided
these for this unusual emergency, as well as a clean shirt. Luckily he
had them all in his trunk. You can keep your own socks and
underclothes.”

Mitya flew into a passion.

“I won’t have other people’s clothes!” he shouted menacingly, “give me
my own!”

“It’s impossible!”

“Give me my own. Damn Kalganov and his clothes, too!”

It was a long time before they could persuade him. But they succeeded
somehow in quieting him down. They impressed upon him that his clothes,
being stained with blood, must be “included with the other material
evidence,” and that they “had not even the right to let him have them
now ... taking into consideration the possible outcome of the case.”
Mitya at last understood this. He subsided into gloomy silence and
hurriedly dressed himself. He merely observed, as he put them on, that
the clothes were much better than his old ones, and that he disliked
“gaining by the change.” The coat was, besides, “ridiculously tight. Am
I to be dressed up like a fool ... for your amusement?”

They urged upon him again that he was exaggerating, that Kalganov was
only a little taller, so that only the trousers might be a little too
long. But the coat turned out to be really tight in the shoulders.

“Damn it all! I can hardly button it,” Mitya grumbled. “Be so good as
to tell Mr. Kalganov from me that I didn’t ask for his clothes, and
it’s not my doing that they’ve dressed me up like a clown.”

“He understands that, and is sorry ... I mean, not sorry to lend you
his clothes, but sorry about all this business,” mumbled Nikolay
Parfenovitch.

“Confound his sorrow! Well, where now? Am I to go on sitting here?”

He was asked to go back to the “other room.” Mitya went in, scowling
with anger, and trying to avoid looking at any one. Dressed in another
man’s clothes he felt himself disgraced, even in the eyes of the
peasants, and of Trifon Borissovitch, whose face appeared, for some
reason, in the doorway, and vanished immediately. “He’s come to look at
me dressed up,” thought Mitya. He sat down on the same chair as before.
He had an absurd nightmarish feeling, as though he were out of his
mind.

“Well, what now? Are you going to flog me? That’s all that’s left for
you,” he said, clenching his teeth and addressing the prosecutor. He
would not turn to Nikolay Parfenovitch, as though he disdained to speak
to him.

“He looked too closely at my socks, and turned them inside out on
purpose to show every one how dirty they were—the scoundrel!”

“Well, now we must proceed to the examination of witnesses,” observed
Nikolay Parfenovitch, as though in reply to Mitya’s question.

“Yes,” said the prosecutor thoughtfully, as though reflecting on
something.

“We’ve done what we could in your interest, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,”
Nikolay Parfenovitch went on, “but having received from you such an
uncompromising refusal to explain to us the source from which you
obtained the money found upon you, we are, at the present moment—”

“What is the stone in your ring?” Mitya interrupted suddenly, as though
awakening from a reverie. He pointed to one of the three large rings
adorning Nikolay Parfenovitch’s right hand.

“Ring?” repeated Nikolay Parfenovitch with surprise.

“Yes, that one ... on your middle finger, with the little veins in it,
what stone is that?” Mitya persisted, like a peevish child.

“That’s a smoky topaz,” said Nikolay Parfenovitch, smiling. “Would you
like to look at it? I’ll take it off ...”

“No, don’t take it off,” cried Mitya furiously, suddenly waking up, and
angry with himself. “Don’t take it off ... there’s no need.... Damn
it!... Gentlemen, you’ve sullied my heart! Can you suppose that I would
conceal it from you, if I had really killed my father, that I would
shuffle, lie, and hide myself? No,