 said. “I’ll just make the sign of the cross over you, for
now. Sit still. Now we’ve a treat for you, in your own line, too. It’ll
make you laugh. Balaam’s ass has begun talking to us here—and how he
talks! How he talks!”

Balaam’s ass, it appeared, was the valet, Smerdyakov. He was a young
man of about four and twenty, remarkably unsociable and taciturn. Not
that he was shy or bashful. On the contrary, he was conceited and
seemed to despise everybody.

But we must pause to say a few words about him now. He was brought up
by Grigory and Marfa, but the boy grew up “with no sense of gratitude,”
as Grigory expressed it; he was an unfriendly boy, and seemed to look
at the world mistrustfully. In his childhood he was very fond of
hanging cats, and burying them with great ceremony. He used to dress up
in a sheet as though it were a surplice, and sang, and waved some
object over the dead cat as though it were a censer. All this he did on
the sly, with the greatest secrecy. Grigory caught him once at this
diversion and gave him a sound beating. He shrank into a corner and
sulked there for a week. “He doesn’t care for you or me, the monster,”
Grigory used to say to Marfa, “and he doesn’t care for any one. Are you
a human being?” he said, addressing the boy directly. “You’re not a
human being. You grew from the mildew in the bath-house.[2] That’s what
you are.” Smerdyakov, it appeared afterwards, could never forgive him
those words. Grigory taught him to read and write, and when he was
twelve years old, began teaching him the Scriptures. But this teaching
came to nothing. At the second or third lesson the boy suddenly
grinned.

“What’s that for?” asked Grigory, looking at him threateningly from
under his spectacles.

“Oh, nothing. God created light on the first day, and the sun, moon,
and stars on the fourth day. Where did the light come from on the first
day?”

Grigory was thunderstruck. The boy looked sarcastically at his teacher.
There was something positively condescending in his expression. Grigory
could not restrain himself. “I’ll show you where!” he cried, and gave
the boy a violent slap on the cheek. The boy took the slap without a
word, but withdrew into his corner again for some days. A week later he
had his first attack of the disease to which he was subject all the
rest of his life—epilepsy. When Fyodor Pavlovitch heard of it, his
attitude to the boy seemed changed at once. Till then he had taken no
notice of him, though he never scolded him, and always gave him a
copeck when he met him. Sometimes, when he was in good humor, he would
send the boy something sweet from his table. But as soon as he heard of
his illness, he showed an active interest in him, sent for a doctor,
and tried remedies, but the disease turned out to be incurable. The
fits occurred, on an average, once a month, but at various intervals.
The fits varied too, in violence: some were light and some were very
severe. Fyodor Pavlovitch strictly forbade Grigory to use corporal
punishment to the boy, and began allowing him to come upstairs to him.
He forbade him to be taught anything whatever for a time, too. One day
when the boy was about fifteen, Fyodor Pavlovitch noticed him lingering
by the bookcase, and reading the titles through the glass. Fyodor
Pavlovitch had a fair number of books—over a hundred—but no one ever
saw him reading. He at once gave Smerdyakov the key of the bookcase.
“Come, read. You shall be my librarian. You’ll be better sitting
reading than hanging about the courtyard. Come, read this,” and Fyodor
Pavlovitch gave him _Evenings in a Cottage near Dikanka_.

He read a little but didn’t like it. He did not once smile, and ended
by frowning.

“Why? Isn’t it funny?” asked Fyodor Pavlovitch.

Smerdyakov did not speak.

“Answer, stupid!”

“It’s all untrue,” mumbled the boy, with a grin.

“Then go to the devil! You have the soul of a lackey. Stay, here’s
Smaragdov’s _Universal History_. That’s all true. Read that.”

But Smerdyakov did not get through ten pages of Smaragdov. He thought
it dull. So the bookcase was closed again.

Shortly afterwards Marfa and Grigory reported to Fyodor Pavlovitch that
Smerdyakov was gradually beginning to show an extraordinary
fastidiousness. He would sit before his soup, take up his spoon and
look into the soup, bend over it, examine it, take a spoonful and hold
it to the light.

“What is it? A beetle?” Grigory would ask.

“A fly, perhaps,” observed Marfa.

The squeamish youth never answered, but he did the same with his bread,
his meat, and everything he ate. He would hold a piece on his fork to
the light, scrutinize it microscopically, and only after long
deliberation decide to put it in his mouth.

“Ach! What fine gentlemen’s airs!” Grigory muttered, looking at him.

When Fyodor Pavlovitch heard of this development in Smerdyakov he
determined to make him his cook, and sent him to Moscow to be trained.
He spent some years there and came back remarkably changed in
appearance. He looked extraordinarily old for his age. His face had
grown wrinkled, yellow, and strangely emasculate. In character he
seemed almost exactly the same as before he went away. He was just as
unsociable, and showed not the slightest inclination for any
companionship. In Moscow, too, as we heard afterwards, he had always
been silent. Moscow itself had little interest for him; he saw very
little there, and took scarcely any notice of anything. He went once to
the theater, but returned silent and displeased with it. On the other
hand, he came back to us from Moscow well dressed, in a clean coat and
clean linen. He brushed his clothes most scrupulously twice a day
invariably, and was very fond of cleaning his smart calf boots with a
special English polish, so that they shone like mirrors. He turned out
a first-rate cook. Fyodor Pavlovitch paid him a salary, almost the
whole of which Smerdyakov spent on clothes, pomade, perfumes, and such
things. But he seemed to have as much contempt for the female sex as
for men; he was discreet, almost unapproachable, with them. Fyodor
Pavlovitch began to regard him rather differently. His fits were
becoming more frequent, and on the days he was ill Marfa cooked, which
did not suit Fyodor Pavlovitch at all.

“Why are your fits getting worse?” asked Fyodor Pavlovitch, looking
askance at his new cook. “Would you like to get married? Shall I find
you a wife?”

But Smerdyakov turned pale with anger, and made no reply. Fyodor
Pavlovitch left him with an impatient gesture. The great thing was that
he had absolute confidence in his honesty. It happened once, when
Fyodor Pavlovitch was drunk, that he dropped in the muddy courtyard
three hundred-rouble notes which he had only just received. He only
missed them next day, and was just hastening to search his pockets when
he saw the notes lying on the table. Where had they come from?
Smerdyakov had picked them up and brought them in the day before.

“Well, my lad, I’ve never met any one like you,” Fyodor Pavlovitch said
shortly, and gave him ten roubles. We may add that he not only believed
in his honesty, but had, for some reason, a liking for him, although
the young man looked as morosely at him as at every one and was always
silent. He rarely spoke. If it had occurred to any one to wonder at the
time what the young man was interested in, and what was in his mind, it
would have been impossible to tell by looking at him. Yet he used
sometimes to stop suddenly in the house, or even in the yard or street,
and would stand still for ten minutes, lost in thought. A physiognomist
studying his face would have said that there was no thought in it, no
reflection, but only a sort of contemplation. There is a remarkable
picture by the painter Kramskoy, called “Contemplation.” There is a
forest in winter, and on a roadway through the forest, in absolute
solitude, stands a peasant in a torn kaftan and bark shoes. He stands,
as it were, lost in thought. Yet he is not thinking; he is
“contemplating.” If any one touched him he would start and look at one
as though awakening and bewildered. It’s true he would come to himself
immediately; but if he were asked what he had been thinking about, he
would remember nothing. Yet probably he has, hidden within himself, the
impression which had dominated him during the period of contemplation.
Those impressions are dear to him and no doubt he hoards them
imperceptibly, and even unconsciously. How and why, of course, he does
not know either. He may suddenly, after hoarding impressions for many
years, abandon everything and go off to Jerusalem on a pilgrimage for
his soul’s salvation, or perhaps he will suddenly set fire to his
native village, and perhaps do both. There are a good many
“contemplatives” among the peasantry. Well, Smerdyakov was probably one
of them, and he probably was greedily hoarding up his impressions,
hardly knowing why.




Chapter VII.
The Controversy


But Balaam’s ass had suddenly spoken. The subject was a strange one.
Grigory had gone in the morning to make purchases, and had heard from
the shopkeeper Lukyanov the story of a Russian soldier which had
appeared in the newspaper of that day. This soldier had been taken
prisoner in some remote part of Asia, and was threatened with an
immediate agonizing death if he did not renounce Christianity and
follow Islam. He refused to deny his faith, and was tortured, flayed
alive, and died, praising and glorifying Christ. Grigory had related
the story at table. Fyodor Pavlovitch always liked, over the dessert
after dinner, to laugh and talk, if only with Grigory. This afternoon
he was in a particularly good-humored and expansive mood. Sipping his
brandy and listening to the story, he observed that they ought to make
a saint of a soldier like that, and to take his skin to some monastery.
“That would make the people flock, and bring the money in.”

Grigory frowned, seeing that Fyodor Pavlovitch was by no means touched,
but, as usual, was beginning to scoff. At that moment Smerdyakov, who
was standing by the door, smiled. Smerdyakov often waited at table
towards the end of dinner, and since Ivan’s arrival in our town he had
done so every day.

“What are you grinning at?” asked Fyodor Pavlovitch, catching the smile
instantly, and knowing that it referred to Grigory.

“Well, my opinion is,” Smerdyakov began suddenly and unexpectedly in a
loud voice, “that if that laudable soldier’s exploit was so very great
there would have been, to my thinking, no sin in it if he had on such
an emergency renounced, so to speak, the name of Christ and his own
christening, to save by that same his life, for good deeds, by which,
in the course of years to expiate his cowardice.”

“How could it not be a sin? You’re talking nonsense. For that you’ll go
straight to hell and be roasted there like mutton,” put in Fyodor
Pavlovitch.

It was at this point that Alyosha came in, and Fyodor Pavlovitch, as we
have seen, was highly delighted at his appearance.

“We’re on your subject, your subject,” he chuckled gleefully, making
Alyosha sit down to listen.

“As for mutton, that’s not so, and there’ll be nothing there for this,
and there shouldn’t be either, if it’s according to justice,”
Smerdyakov maintained stoutly.

“How do you mean ‘according to justice’?” Fyodor Pavlovitch cried still
more gayly, nudging Alyosha with his knee.

“He’s a rascal, that’s what he is!” burst from Grigory. He looked
Smerdyakov wrathfully in the face.

“As for being a rascal, wait a little, Grigory Vassilyevitch,” answered
Smerdyakov with perfect composure. “You’d better consider yourself
that, once I am taken prisoner by the enemies of the Christian race,
and they demand from me to curse the name of God and to renounce my
holy christening, I am fully entitled to act by my own reason, since
there would be no sin in it.”

“But you’ve said that before. Don’t waste words. Prove it,” cried
Fyodor Pavlovitch.

“Soup-maker!” muttered Grigory contemptuously.

“As for being a soup-maker, wait a bit, too, and consider for yourself,
Grigory Vassilyevitch, without abusing me. For as soon as I say to
those enemies, ‘No, I’m not a Christian, and I curse my true God,’ then
at once, by God’s high judgment, I become immediately and specially
anathema accursed, and am cut off from the Holy Church, exactly as
though I were a heathen, so that at that very instant, not only when I
say it aloud, but when I think of saying it, before a quarter of a
second has passed, I am cut off. Is that so or not, Grigory
Vassilyevitch?”

He addressed Grigory with obvious satisfaction, though he was really
answering Fyodor Pavlovitch’s questions, and was well aware of it, and
intentionally pretending that Grigory had asked the questions.

“Ivan,” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch suddenly, “stoop down for me to
whisper. He’s got this all up for your benefit. He wants you to praise
him. Praise him.”

Ivan listened with perfect seriousness to his father’s excited whisper.

“Stay, Smerdyakov, be quiet a minute,” cried Fyodor Pavlovitch once
more. “Ivan, your ear again.”

Ivan bent down again with a perfectly grave face.

“I love you as I do Alyosha. Don’t think I don’t love you. Some
brandy?”

“Yes.—But you’re rather drunk yourself,” thought Ivan, looking steadily
at his father.

He was watching Smerdyakov with great curiosity.

“You’re anathema accursed, as it is,” Grigory suddenly burst out, “and
how dare you argue, you rascal, after that, if—”

“Don’t scold him, Grigory, don’t scold him,” Fyodor Pavlovitch cut him
short.

“You should wait, Grigory Vassilyevitch, if only a short time, and
listen, for I haven’t finished all I had to say. For at the very moment
I become accursed, at that same highest moment, I become exactly like a
heathen, and my christening is taken off me and becomes of no avail.
Isn’t that so?”

“Make haste and finish, my boy,” Fyodor Pavlovitch urged him, sipping
from his wine-glass with relish.

“And if I’ve ceased to be a Christian, then I told no lie to the enemy
when they asked whether I was a Christian or not a Christian, seeing I
had already been relieved by God Himself of my Christianity by reason
of the thought alone, before I had time to utter a word to the enemy.
And if I have already been discharged, in what manner and with what
sort of justice can I be held responsible as a Christian in the other
world for having denied Christ, when, through the very thought alone,
before denying Him I had been relieved from my christening? If I’m no
longer a Christian, then I can’t renounce Christ, for I’ve nothing then
to renounce. Who will hold an unclean Tatar responsible, Grigory
Vassilyevitch, even in heaven, for not having been born a Christian?
And who would punish him for that, considering that you can’t take two
skins off one ox? For God Almighty Himself, even if He did make the
Tatar responsible, when he dies would give him the smallest possible
punishment, I imagine (since he must be punished), judging that he is
not to blame if he has come into the world an unclean heathen, from
heathen parents. The Lord God can’t surely take a Tatar and say he was
a Christian? That would mean that the Almighty would tell a real
untruth. And can the Lord of Heaven and earth tell a lie, even in one
word?”

Grigory was thunderstruck and looked at the orator, his eyes nearly
starting out of his head. Though he did not clearly understand what was
said, he had caught something in this rigmarole, and stood, looking
like a man who has just hit his head against a wall. Fyodor Pavlovitch
emptied his glass and went off into his shrill laugh.

“Alyosha! Alyosha! What do you say to that! Ah, you casuist! He must
have been with the Jesuits, somewhere, Ivan. Oh, you stinking Jesuit,
who taught you? But you’re talking nonsense, you casuist, nonsense,
nonsense, nonsense. Don’t cry, Grigory, we’ll reduce him to smoke and
ashes in a moment. Tell me this, O ass; you may be right before your
enemies, but you have renounced your faith all the same in your own
heart, and you say yourself that in that very hour you became anathema
accursed. And if once you’re anathema they won’t pat you on the head
for it in hell. What do you say to that, my fine Jesuit?”

“There is no doubt that I have renounced it in my own heart, but there
was no special sin in that. Or if there was sin, it was the most
ordinary.”

“How’s that the most ordinary?”

“You lie, accursed one!” hissed Grigory.

“Consider yourself, Grigory Vassilyevitch,” Smerdyakov went on, staid
and unruffled, conscious of his triumph, but, as it were, generous to
the vanquished foe. “Consider yourself, Grigory Vassilyevitch; it is
said in the Scripture that if you have faith, even as a mustard seed,
and bid a mountain move into the sea, it will move without the least
delay at your bidding. Well, Grigory Vassilyevitch, if I’m without
faith and you have so great a faith that you are continually swearing
at me, you try yourself telling this mountain, not to move into the sea
for that’s a long way off, but even to our stinking little river which
runs at the