 out
at seven to herd the flock in cold and wet, and no one hesitated or
scrupled to treat him so. Quite the contrary, they thought they had
every right, for Richard had been given to them as a chattel, and they
did not even see the necessity of feeding him. Richard himself
describes how in those years, like the Prodigal Son in the Gospel, he
longed to eat of the mash given to the pigs, which were fattened for
sale. But they wouldn’t even give him that, and beat him when he stole
from the pigs. And that was how he spent all his childhood and his
youth, till he grew up and was strong enough to go away and be a thief.
The savage began to earn his living as a day laborer in Geneva. He
drank what he earned, he lived like a brute, and finished by killing
and robbing an old man. He was caught, tried, and condemned to death.
They are not sentimentalists there. And in prison he was immediately
surrounded by pastors, members of Christian brotherhoods, philanthropic
ladies, and the like. They taught him to read and write in prison, and
expounded the Gospel to him. They exhorted him, worked upon him,
drummed at him incessantly, till at last he solemnly confessed his
crime. He was converted. He wrote to the court himself that he was a
monster, but that in the end God had vouchsafed him light and shown
grace. All Geneva was in excitement about him—all philanthropic and
religious Geneva. All the aristocratic and well-bred society of the
town rushed to the prison, kissed Richard and embraced him; ‘You are
our brother, you have found grace.’ And Richard does nothing but weep
with emotion, ‘Yes, I’ve found grace! All my youth and childhood I was
glad of pigs’ food, but now even I have found grace. I am dying in the
Lord.’ ‘Yes, Richard, die in the Lord; you have shed blood and must
die. Though it’s not your fault that you knew not the Lord, when you
coveted the pigs’ food and were beaten for stealing it (which was very
wrong of you, for stealing is forbidden); but you’ve shed blood and you
must die.’ And on the last day, Richard, perfectly limp, did nothing
but cry and repeat every minute: ‘This is my happiest day. I am going
to the Lord.’ ‘Yes,’ cry the pastors and the judges and philanthropic
ladies. ‘This is the happiest day of your life, for you are going to
the Lord!’ They all walk or drive to the scaffold in procession behind
the prison van. At the scaffold they call to Richard: ‘Die, brother,
die in the Lord, for even thou hast found grace!’ And so, covered with
his brothers’ kisses, Richard is dragged on to the scaffold, and led to
the guillotine. And they chopped off his head in brotherly fashion,
because he had found grace. Yes, that’s characteristic. That pamphlet
is translated into Russian by some Russian philanthropists of
aristocratic rank and evangelical aspirations, and has been distributed
gratis for the enlightenment of the people. The case of Richard is
interesting because it’s national. Though to us it’s absurd to cut off
a man’s head, because he has become our brother and has found grace,
yet we have our own speciality, which is all but worse. Our historical
pastime is the direct satisfaction of inflicting pain. There are lines
in Nekrassov describing how a peasant lashes a horse on the eyes, ‘on
its meek eyes,’ every one must have seen it. It’s peculiarly Russian.
He describes how a feeble little nag has foundered under too heavy a
load and cannot move. The peasant beats it, beats it savagely, beats it
at last not knowing what he is doing in the intoxication of cruelty,
thrashes it mercilessly over and over again. ‘However weak you are, you
must pull, if you die for it.’ The nag strains, and then he begins
lashing the poor defenseless creature on its weeping, on its ‘meek
eyes.’ The frantic beast tugs and draws the load, trembling all over,
gasping for breath, moving sideways, with a sort of unnatural spasmodic
action—it’s awful in Nekrassov. But that’s only a horse, and God has
given horses to be beaten. So the Tatars have taught us, and they left
us the knout as a remembrance of it. But men, too, can be beaten. A
well-educated, cultured gentleman and his wife beat their own child
with a birch-rod, a girl of seven. I have an exact account of it. The
papa was glad that the birch was covered with twigs. ‘It stings more,’
said he, and so he began stinging his daughter. I know for a fact there
are people who at every blow are worked up to sensuality, to literal
sensuality, which increases progressively at every blow they inflict.
They beat for a minute, for five minutes, for ten minutes, more often
and more savagely. The child screams. At last the child cannot scream,
it gasps, ‘Daddy! daddy!’ By some diabolical unseemly chance the case
was brought into court. A counsel is engaged. The Russian people have
long called a barrister ‘a conscience for hire.’ The counsel protests
in his client’s defense. ‘It’s such a simple thing,’ he says, ‘an
everyday domestic event. A father corrects his child. To our shame be
it said, it is brought into court.’ The jury, convinced by him, give a
favorable verdict. The public roars with delight that the torturer is
acquitted. Ah, pity I wasn’t there! I would have proposed to raise a
subscription in his honor! Charming pictures.

“But I’ve still better things about children. I’ve collected a great,
great deal about Russian children, Alyosha. There was a little girl of
five who was hated by her father and mother, ‘most worthy and
respectable people, of good education and breeding.’ You see, I must
repeat again, it is a peculiar characteristic of many people, this love
of torturing children, and children only. To all other types of
humanity these torturers behave mildly and benevolently, like
cultivated and humane Europeans; but they are very fond of tormenting
children, even fond of children themselves in that sense. It’s just
their defenselessness that tempts the tormentor, just the angelic
confidence of the child who has no refuge and no appeal, that sets his
vile blood on fire. In every man, of course, a demon lies hidden—the
demon of rage, the demon of lustful heat at the screams of the tortured
victim, the demon of lawlessness let off the chain, the demon of
diseases that follow on vice, gout, kidney disease, and so on.

“This poor child of five was subjected to every possible torture by
those cultivated parents. They beat her, thrashed her, kicked her for
no reason till her body was one bruise. Then, they went to greater
refinements of cruelty—shut her up all night in the cold and frost in a
privy, and because she didn’t ask to be taken up at night (as though a
child of five sleeping its angelic, sound sleep could be trained to
wake and ask), they smeared her face and filled her mouth with
excrement, and it was her mother, her mother did this. And that mother
could sleep, hearing the poor child’s groans! Can you understand why a
little creature, who can’t even understand what’s done to her, should
beat her little aching heart with her tiny fist in the dark and the
cold, and weep her meek unresentful tears to dear, kind God to protect
her? Do you understand that, friend and brother, you pious and humble
novice? Do you understand why this infamy must be and is permitted?
Without it, I am told, man could not have existed on earth, for he
could not have known good and evil. Why should he know that diabolical
good and evil when it costs so much? Why, the whole world of knowledge
is not worth that child’s prayer to ‘dear, kind God’! I say nothing of
the sufferings of grown-up people, they have eaten the apple, damn
them, and the devil take them all! But these little ones! I am making
you suffer, Alyosha, you are not yourself. I’ll leave off if you like.”

“Never mind. I want to suffer too,” muttered Alyosha.

“One picture, only one more, because it’s so curious, so
characteristic, and I have only just read it in some collection of
Russian antiquities. I’ve forgotten the name. I must look it up. It was
in the darkest days of serfdom at the beginning of the century, and
long live the Liberator of the People! There was in those days a
general of aristocratic connections, the owner of great estates, one of
those men—somewhat exceptional, I believe, even then—who, retiring from
the service into a life of leisure, are convinced that they’ve earned
absolute power over the lives of their subjects. There were such men
then. So our general, settled on his property of two thousand souls,
lives in pomp, and domineers over his poor neighbors as though they
were dependents and buffoons. He has kennels of hundreds of hounds and
nearly a hundred dog-boys—all mounted, and in uniform. One day a
serf-boy, a little child of eight, threw a stone in play and hurt the
paw of the general’s favorite hound. ‘Why is my favorite dog lame?’ He
is told that the boy threw a stone that hurt the dog’s paw. ‘So you did
it.’ The general looked the child up and down. ‘Take him.’ He was
taken—taken from his mother and kept shut up all night. Early that
morning the general comes out on horseback, with the hounds, his
dependents, dog-boys, and huntsmen, all mounted around him in full
hunting parade. The servants are summoned for their edification, and in
front of them all stands the mother of the child. The child is brought
from the lock-up. It’s a gloomy, cold, foggy autumn day, a capital day
for hunting. The general orders the child to be undressed; the child is
stripped naked. He shivers, numb with terror, not daring to cry....
‘Make him run,’ commands the general. ‘Run! run!’ shout the dog-boys.
The boy runs.... ‘At him!’ yells the general, and he sets the whole
pack of hounds on the child. The hounds catch him, and tear him to
pieces before his mother’s eyes!... I believe the general was
afterwards declared incapable of administering his estates. Well—what
did he deserve? To be shot? To be shot for the satisfaction of our
moral feelings? Speak, Alyosha!”

“To be shot,” murmured Alyosha, lifting his eyes to Ivan with a pale,
twisted smile.

“Bravo!” cried Ivan, delighted. “If even you say so.... You’re a pretty
monk! So there is a little devil sitting in your heart, Alyosha
Karamazov!”

“What I said was absurd, but—”

“That’s just the point, that ‘but’!” cried Ivan. “Let me tell you,
novice, that the absurd is only too necessary on earth. The world
stands on absurdities, and perhaps nothing would have come to pass in
it without them. We know what we know!”

“What do you know?”

“I understand nothing,” Ivan went on, as though in delirium. “I don’t
want to understand anything now. I want to stick to the fact. I made up
my mind long ago not to understand. If I try to understand anything, I
shall be false to the fact, and I have determined to stick to the
fact.”

“Why are you trying me?” Alyosha cried, with sudden distress. “Will you
say what you mean at last?”

“Of course, I will; that’s what I’ve been leading up to. You are dear
to me, I don’t want to let you go, and I won’t give you up to your
Zossima.”

Ivan for a minute was silent, his face became all at once very sad.

“Listen! I took the case of children only to make my case clearer. Of
the other tears of humanity with which the earth is soaked from its
crust to its center, I will say nothing. I have narrowed my subject on
purpose. I am a bug, and I recognize in all humility that I cannot
understand why the world is arranged as it is. Men are themselves to
blame, I suppose; they were given paradise, they wanted freedom, and
stole fire from heaven, though they knew they would become unhappy, so
there is no need to pity them. With my pitiful, earthly, Euclidian
understanding, all I know is that there is suffering and that there are
none guilty; that cause follows effect, simply and directly; that
everything flows and finds its level—but that’s only Euclidian
nonsense, I know that, and I can’t consent to live by it! What comfort
is it to me that there are none guilty and that cause follows effect
simply and directly, and that I know it?—I must have justice, or I will
destroy myself. And not justice in some remote infinite time and space,
but here on earth, and that I could see myself. I have believed in it.
I want to see it, and if I am dead by then, let me rise again, for if
it all happens without me, it will be too unfair. Surely I haven’t
suffered, simply that I, my crimes and my sufferings, may manure the
soil of the future harmony for somebody else. I want to see with my own
eyes the hind lie down with the lion and the victim rise up and embrace
his murderer. I want to be there when every one suddenly understands
what it has all been for. All the religions of the world are built on
this longing, and I am a believer. But then there are the children, and
what am I to do about them? That’s a question I can’t answer. For the
hundredth time I repeat, there are numbers of questions, but I’ve only
taken the children, because in their case what I mean is so
unanswerably clear. Listen! If all must suffer to pay for the eternal
harmony, what have children to do with it, tell me, please? It’s beyond
all comprehension why they should suffer, and why they should pay for
the harmony. Why should they, too, furnish material to enrich the soil
for the harmony of the future? I understand solidarity in sin among
men. I understand solidarity in retribution, too; but there can be no
such solidarity with children. And if it is really true that they must
share responsibility for all their fathers’ crimes, such a truth is not
of this world and is beyond my comprehension. Some jester will say,
perhaps, that the child would have grown up and have sinned, but you
see he didn’t grow up, he was torn to pieces by the dogs, at eight
years old. Oh, Alyosha, I am not blaspheming! I understand, of course,
what an upheaval of the universe it will be, when everything in heaven
and earth blends in one hymn of praise and everything that lives and
has lived cries aloud: ‘Thou art just, O Lord, for Thy ways are
revealed.’ When the mother embraces the fiend who threw her child to
the dogs, and all three cry aloud with tears, ‘Thou art just, O Lord!’
then, of course, the crown of knowledge will be reached and all will be
made clear. But what pulls me up here is that I can’t accept that
harmony. And while I am on earth, I make haste to take my own measures.
You see, Alyosha, perhaps it really may happen that if I live to that
moment, or rise again to see it, I, too, perhaps, may cry aloud with
the rest, looking at the mother embracing the child’s torturer, ‘Thou
art just, O Lord!’ but I don’t want to cry aloud then. While there is
still time, I hasten to protect myself, and so I renounce the higher
harmony altogether. It’s not worth the tears of that one tortured child
who beat itself on the breast with its little fist and prayed in its
stinking outhouse, with its unexpiated tears to ‘dear, kind God’! It’s
not worth it, because those tears are unatoned for. They must be atoned
for, or there can be no harmony. But how? How are you going to atone
for them? Is it possible? By their being avenged? But what do I care
for avenging them? What do I care for a hell for oppressors? What good
can hell do, since those children have already been tortured? And what
becomes of harmony, if there is hell? I want to forgive. I want to
embrace. I don’t want more suffering. And if the sufferings of children
go to swell the sum of sufferings which was necessary to pay for truth,
then I protest that the truth is not worth such a price. I don’t want
the mother to embrace the oppressor who threw her son to the dogs! She
dare not forgive him! Let her forgive him for herself, if she will, let
her forgive the torturer for the immeasurable suffering of her mother’s
heart. But the sufferings of her tortured child she has no right to
forgive; she dare not forgive the torturer, even if the child were to
forgive him! And if that is so, if they dare not forgive, what becomes
of harmony? Is there in the whole world a being who would have the
right to forgive and could forgive? I don’t want harmony. From love for
humanity I don’t want it. I would rather be left with the unavenged
suffering. I would rather remain with my unavenged suffering and
unsatisfied indignation, _even if I were wrong_. Besides, too high a
price is asked for harmony; it’s beyond our means to pay so much to
enter on it. And so I hasten to give back my entrance ticket, and if I
am an honest man