 want, you saucy jackanapes!”

There was a roar of laughter among the other market women round her.
Suddenly a man in a violent rage darted out from the arcade of shops
close by. He was a young man, not a native of the town, with dark,
curly hair and a long, pale face, marked with smallpox. He wore a long
blue coat and a peaked cap, and looked like a merchant’s clerk. He was
in a state of stupid excitement and brandished his fist at Kolya.

“I know you!” he cried angrily, “I know you!”

Kolya stared at him. He could not recall when he could have had a row
with the man. But he had been in so many rows in the street that he
could hardly remember them all.

“Do you?” he asked sarcastically.

“I know you! I know you!” the man repeated idiotically.

“So much the better for you. Well, it’s time I was going. Good-by!”

“You are at your saucy pranks again?” cried the man. “You are at your
saucy pranks again? I know, you are at it again!”

“It’s not your business, brother, if I am at my saucy pranks again,”
said Kolya, standing still and scanning him.

“Not my business?”

“No; it’s not your business.”

“Whose then? Whose then? Whose then?”

“It’s Trifon Nikititch’s business, not yours.”

“What Trifon Nikititch?” asked the youth, staring with loutish
amazement at Kolya, but still as angry as ever.

Kolya scanned him gravely.

“Have you been to the Church of the Ascension?” he suddenly asked him,
with stern emphasis.

“What Church of Ascension? What for? No, I haven’t,” said the young
man, somewhat taken aback.

“Do you know Sabaneyev?” Kolya went on even more emphatically and even
more severely.

“What Sabaneyev? No, I don’t know him.”

“Well then you can go to the devil,” said Kolya, cutting short the
conversation; and turning sharply to the right he strode quickly on his
way as though he disdained further conversation with a dolt who did not
even know Sabaneyev.

“Stop, heigh! What Sabaneyev?” the young man recovered from his
momentary stupefaction and was as excited as before. “What did he say?”
He turned to the market women with a silly stare.

The women laughed.

“You can never tell what he’s after,” said one of them.

“What Sabaneyev is it he’s talking about?” the young man repeated,
still furious and brandishing his right arm.

“It must be a Sabaneyev who worked for the Kuzmitchovs, that’s who it
must be,” one of the women suggested.

The young man stared at her wildly.

“For the Kuzmitchovs?” repeated another woman. “But his name wasn’t
Trifon. His name’s Kuzma, not Trifon; but the boy said Trifon
Nikititch, so it can’t be the same.”

“His name is not Trifon and not Sabaneyev, it’s Tchizhov,” put in
suddenly a third woman, who had hitherto been silent, listening
gravely. “Alexey Ivanitch is his name. Tchizhov, Alexey Ivanitch.”

“Not a doubt about it, it’s Tchizhov,” a fourth woman emphatically
confirmed the statement.

The bewildered youth gazed from one to another.

“But what did he ask for, what did he ask for, good people?” he cried
almost in desperation. “‘Do you know Sabaneyev?’ says he. And who the
devil’s to know who is Sabaneyev?”

“You’re a senseless fellow. I tell you it’s not Sabaneyev, but
Tchizhov, Alexey Ivanitch Tchizhov, that’s who it is!” one of the women
shouted at him impressively.

“What Tchizhov? Who is he? Tell me, if you know.”

“That tall, sniveling fellow who used to sit in the market in the
summer.”

“And what’s your Tchizhov to do with me, good people, eh?”

“How can I tell what he’s to do with you?” put in another. “You ought
to know yourself what you want with him, if you make such a clamor
about him. He spoke to you, he did not speak to us, you stupid. Don’t
you really know him?”

“Know whom?”

“Tchizhov.”

“The devil take Tchizhov and you with him. I’ll give him a hiding, that
I will. He was laughing at me!”

“Will give Tchizhov a hiding! More likely he will give you one. You are
a fool, that’s what you are!”

“Not Tchizhov, not Tchizhov, you spiteful, mischievous woman. I’ll give
the boy a hiding. Catch him, catch him, he was laughing at me!”

The woman guffawed. But Kolya was by now a long way off, marching along
with a triumphant air. Smurov walked beside him, looking round at the
shouting group far behind. He too was in high spirits, though he was
still afraid of getting into some scrape in Kolya’s company.

“What Sabaneyev did you mean?” he asked Kolya, foreseeing what his
answer would be.

“How do I know? Now there’ll be a hubbub among them all day. I like to
stir up fools in every class of society. There’s another blockhead,
that peasant there. You know, they say ‘there’s no one stupider than a
stupid Frenchman,’ but a stupid Russian shows it in his face just as
much. Can’t you see it all over his face that he is a fool, that
peasant, eh?”

“Let him alone, Kolya. Let’s go on.”

“Nothing could stop me, now I am once off. Hey, good morning, peasant!”

A sturdy-looking peasant, with a round, simple face and grizzled beard,
who was walking by, raised his head and looked at the boy. He seemed
not quite sober.

“Good morning, if you are not laughing at me,” he said deliberately in
reply.

“And if I am?” laughed Kolya.

“Well, a joke’s a joke. Laugh away. I don’t mind. There’s no harm in a
joke.”

“I beg your pardon, brother, it was a joke.”

“Well, God forgive you!”

“Do you forgive me, too?”

“I quite forgive you. Go along.”

“I say, you seem a clever peasant.”

“Cleverer than you,” the peasant answered unexpectedly, with the same
gravity.

“I doubt it,” said Kolya, somewhat taken aback.

“It’s true, though.”

“Perhaps it is.”

“It is, brother.”

“Good-by, peasant!”

“Good-by!”

“There are all sorts of peasants,” Kolya observed to Smurov after a
brief silence. “How could I tell I had hit on a clever one? I am always
ready to recognize intelligence in the peasantry.”

In the distance the cathedral clock struck half-past eleven. The boys
made haste and they walked as far as Captain Snegiryov’s lodging, a
considerable distance, quickly and almost in silence. Twenty paces from
the house Kolya stopped and told Smurov to go on ahead and ask
Karamazov to come out to him.

“One must sniff round a bit first,” he observed to Smurov.

“Why ask him to come out?” Smurov protested. “You go in; they will be
awfully glad to see you. What’s the sense of making friends in the
frost out here?”

“I know why I want to see him out here in the frost,” Kolya cut him
short in the despotic tone he was fond of adopting with “small boys,”
and Smurov ran to do his bidding.




Chapter IV.
The Lost Dog


Kolya leaned against the fence with an air of dignity, waiting for
Alyosha to appear. Yes, he had long wanted to meet him. He had heard a
great deal about him from the boys, but hitherto he had always
maintained an appearance of disdainful indifference when he was
mentioned, and he had even “criticized” what he heard about Alyosha.
But secretly he had a great longing to make his acquaintance; there was
something sympathetic and attractive in all he was told about Alyosha.
So the present moment was important: to begin with, he had to show
himself at his best, to show his independence, “Or he’ll think of me as
thirteen and take me for a boy, like the rest of them. And what are
these boys to him? I shall ask him when I get to know him. It’s a pity
I am so short, though. Tuzikov is younger than I am, yet he is half a
head taller. But I have a clever face. I am not good-looking. I know
I’m hideous, but I’ve a clever face. I mustn’t talk too freely; if I
fall into his arms all at once, he may think—Tfoo! how horrible if he
should think—!”

Such were the thoughts that excited Kolya while he was doing his utmost
to assume the most independent air. What distressed him most was his
being so short; he did not mind so much his “hideous” face, as being so
short. On the wall in a corner at home he had the year before made a
pencil-mark to show his height, and every two months since he anxiously
measured himself against it to see how much he had gained. But alas! he
grew very slowly, and this sometimes reduced him almost to despair. His
face was in reality by no means “hideous”; on the contrary, it was
rather attractive, with a fair, pale skin, freckled. His small, lively
gray eyes had a fearless look, and often glowed with feeling. He had
rather high cheekbones; small, very red, but not very thick, lips; his
nose was small and unmistakably turned up. “I’ve a regular pug nose, a
regular pug nose,” Kolya used to mutter to himself when he looked in
the looking-glass, and he always left it with indignation. “But perhaps
I haven’t got a clever face?” he sometimes thought, doubtful even of
that. But it must not be supposed that his mind was preoccupied with
his face and his height. On the contrary, however bitter the moments
before the looking-glass were to him, he quickly forgot them, and
forgot them for a long time, “abandoning himself entirely to ideas and
to real life,” as he formulated it to himself.

Alyosha came out quickly and hastened up to Kolya. Before he reached
him, Kolya could see that he looked delighted. “Can he be so glad to
see me?” Kolya wondered, feeling pleased. We may note here, in passing,
that Alyosha’s appearance had undergone a complete change since we saw
him last. He had abandoned his cassock and was wearing now a well-cut
coat, a soft, round hat, and his hair had been cropped short. All this
was very becoming to him, and he looked quite handsome. His charming
face always had a good-humored expression; but there was a gentleness
and serenity in his good-humor. To Kolya’s surprise, Alyosha came out
to him just as he was, without an overcoat. He had evidently come in
haste. He held out his hand to Kolya at once.

“Here you are at last! How anxious we’ve been to see you!”

“There were reasons which you shall know directly. Anyway, I am glad to
make your acquaintance. I’ve long been hoping for an opportunity, and
have heard a great deal about you,” Kolya muttered, a little
breathless.

“We should have met anyway. I’ve heard a great deal about you, too; but
you’ve been a long time coming here.”

“Tell me, how are things going?”

“Ilusha is very ill. He is certainly dying.”

“How awful! You must admit that medicine is a fraud, Karamazov,” cried
Kolya warmly.

“Ilusha has mentioned you often, very often, even in his sleep, in
delirium, you know. One can see that you used to be very, very dear to
him ... before the incident ... with the knife.... Then there’s another
reason.... Tell me, is that your dog?”

“Yes, Perezvon.”

“Not Zhutchka?” Alyosha looked at Kolya with eyes full of pity. “Is she
lost for ever?”

“I know you would all like it to be Zhutchka. I’ve heard all about it.”
Kolya smiled mysteriously. “Listen, Karamazov, I’ll tell you all about
it. That’s what I came for; that’s what I asked you to come out here
for, to explain the whole episode to you before we go in,” he began
with animation. “You see, Karamazov, Ilusha came into the preparatory
class last spring. Well, you know what our preparatory class is—a lot
of small boys. They began teasing Ilusha at once. I am two classes
higher up, and, of course, I only look on at them from a distance. I
saw the boy was weak and small, but he wouldn’t give in to them; he
fought with them. I saw he was proud, and his eyes were full of fire. I
like children like that. And they teased him all the more. The worst of
it was he was horribly dressed at the time, his breeches were too small
for him, and there were holes in his boots. They worried him about it;
they jeered at him. That I can’t stand. I stood up for him at once, and
gave it to them hot. I beat them, but they adore me, do you know,
Karamazov?” Kolya boasted impulsively; “but I am always fond of
children. I’ve two chickens in my hands at home now—that’s what
detained me to-day. So they left off beating Ilusha and I took him
under my protection. I saw the boy was proud. I tell you that, the boy
was proud; but in the end he became slavishly devoted to me: he did my
slightest bidding, obeyed me as though I were God, tried to copy me. In
the intervals between the classes he used to run to me at once, and I’d
go about with him. On Sundays, too. They always laugh when an older boy
makes friends with a younger one like that; but that’s a prejudice. If
it’s my fancy, that’s enough. I am teaching him, developing him. Why
shouldn’t I develop him if I like him? Here you, Karamazov, have taken
up with all these nestlings. I see you want to influence the younger
generation—to develop them, to be of use to them, and I assure you this
trait in your character, which I knew by hearsay, attracted me more
than anything. Let us get to the point, though. I noticed that there
was a sort of softness and sentimentality coming over the boy, and you
know I have a positive hatred of this sheepish sentimentality, and I
have had it from a baby. There were contradictions in him, too: he was
proud, but he was slavishly devoted to me, and yet all at once his eyes
would flash and he’d refuse to agree with me; he’d argue, fly into a
rage. I used sometimes to propound certain ideas; I could see that it
was not so much that he disagreed with the ideas, but that he was
simply rebelling against me, because I was cool in responding to his
endearments. And so, in order to train him properly, the tenderer he
was, the colder I became. I did it on purpose: that was my idea. My
object was to form his character, to lick him into shape, to make a man
of him ... and besides ... no doubt, you understand me at a word.
Suddenly I noticed for three days in succession he was downcast and
dejected, not because of my coldness, but for something else, something
more important. I wondered what the tragedy was. I have pumped him and
found out that he had somehow got to know Smerdyakov, who was footman
to your late father—it was before his death, of course—and he taught
the little fool a silly trick—that is, a brutal, nasty trick. He told
him to take a piece of bread, to stick a pin in it, and throw it to one
of those hungry dogs who snap up anything without biting it, and then
to watch and see what would happen. So they prepared a piece of bread
like that and threw it to Zhutchka, that shaggy dog there’s been such a
fuss about. The people of the house it belonged to never fed it at all,
though it barked all day. (Do you like that stupid barking, Karamazov?
I can’t stand it.) So it rushed at the bread, swallowed it, and began
to squeal; it turned round and round and ran away, squealing as it ran
out of sight. That was Ilusha’s own account of it. He confessed it to
me, and cried bitterly. He hugged me, shaking all over. He kept on
repeating ‘He ran away squealing’: the sight of that haunted him. He
was tormented by remorse, I could see that. I took it seriously. I
determined to give him a lesson for other things as well. So I must
confess I wasn’t quite straightforward, and pretended to be more
indignant perhaps than I was. ‘You’ve done a nasty thing,’ I said, ‘you
are a scoundrel. I won’t tell of it, of course, but I shall have
nothing more to do with you for a time. I’ll think it over and let you
know through Smurov’—that’s the boy who’s just come with me; he’s
always ready to do anything for me—‘whether I will have anything to do
with you in the future or whether I give you up for good as a
scoundrel.’ He was tremendously upset. I must own I felt I’d gone too
far as I spoke, but there was no help for it. I did what I thought best
at the time. A day or two after, I sent Smurov to tell him that I would
not speak to him again. That’s what we call it when two schoolfellows
refuse to have anything more to do with one another. Secretly I only
meant to send him to Coventry for a few days and then, if I saw signs
of repentance, to hold out my hand to him again. That was my intention.
But what do you think happened? He heard Smurov’s message, his eyes
flashed. ‘Tell Krassotkin from me,’ he cried, ‘that I will throw bread
with pins to all the dogs—all—all of them!’ ‘So he’s going in for a
little temper. We must smoke it out of him.’ And I began to treat him
with contempt; whenever I met him I turned away or smiled
sarcastically. And just then