 am a servant,” Grigory said suddenly, in a loud and distinct voice.
“If my betters think fit to make game of me, it is my duty to suffer
it.”

Fetyukovitch was a little taken aback, and the President intervened,
reminding him that he must ask more relevant questions. Fetyukovitch
bowed with dignity and said that he had no more questions to ask of the
witness. The public and the jury, of course, were left with a grain of
doubt in their minds as to the evidence of a man who might, while
undergoing a certain cure, have seen “the gates of heaven,” and who did
not even know what year he was living in. But before Grigory left the
box another episode occurred. The President, turning to the prisoner,
asked him whether he had any comment to make on the evidence of the
last witness.

“Except about the door, all he has said is true,” cried Mitya, in a
loud voice. “For combing the lice off me, I thank him; for forgiving my
blows, I thank him. The old man has been honest all his life and as
faithful to my father as seven hundred poodles.”

“Prisoner, be careful in your language,” the President admonished him.

“I am not a poodle,” Grigory muttered.

“All right, it’s I am a poodle myself,” cried Mitya. “If it’s an
insult, I take it to myself and I beg his pardon. I was a beast and
cruel to him. I was cruel to Æsop too.”

“What Æsop?” the President asked sternly again.

“Oh, Pierrot ... my father, Fyodor Pavlovitch.”

The President again and again warned Mitya impressively and very
sternly to be more careful in his language.

“You are injuring yourself in the opinion of your judges.”

The counsel for the defense was equally clever in dealing with the
evidence of Rakitin. I may remark that Rakitin was one of the leading
witnesses and one to whom the prosecutor attached great significance.
It appeared that he knew everything; his knowledge was amazing, he had
been everywhere, seen everything, talked to everybody, knew every
detail of the biography of Fyodor Pavlovitch and all the Karamazovs. Of
the envelope, it is true, he had only heard from Mitya himself. But he
described minutely Mitya’s exploits in the “Metropolis,” all his
compromising doings and sayings, and told the story of Captain
Snegiryov’s “wisp of tow.” But even Rakitin could say nothing positive
about Mitya’s inheritance, and confined himself to contemptuous
generalities.

“Who could tell which of them was to blame, and which was in debt to
the other, with their crazy Karamazov way of muddling things so that no
one could make head or tail of it?” He attributed the tragic crime to
the habits that had become ingrained by ages of serfdom and the
distressed condition of Russia, due to the lack of appropriate
institutions. He was, in fact, allowed some latitude of speech. This
was the first occasion on which Rakitin showed what he could do, and
attracted notice. The prosecutor knew that the witness was preparing a
magazine article on the case, and afterwards in his speech, as we shall
see later, quoted some ideas from the article, showing that he had seen
it already. The picture drawn by the witness was a gloomy and sinister
one, and greatly strengthened the case for the prosecution. Altogether,
Rakitin’s discourse fascinated the public by its independence and the
extraordinary nobility of its ideas. There were even two or three
outbreaks of applause when he spoke of serfdom and the distressed
condition of Russia.

But Rakitin, in his youthful ardor, made a slight blunder, of which the
counsel for the defense at once adroitly took advantage. Answering
certain questions about Grushenka, and carried away by the loftiness of
his own sentiments and his success, of which he was, of course,
conscious, he went so far as to speak somewhat contemptuously of
Agrafena Alexandrovna as “the kept mistress of Samsonov.” He would have
given a good deal to take back his words afterwards, for Fetyukovitch
caught him out over it at once. And it was all because Rakitin had not
reckoned on the lawyer having been able to become so intimately
acquainted with every detail in so short a time.

“Allow me to ask,” began the counsel for the defense, with the most
affable and even respectful smile, “you are, of course, the same Mr.
Rakitin whose pamphlet, _The Life of the Deceased Elder, Father
Zossima_, published by the diocesan authorities, full of profound and
religious reflections and preceded by an excellent and devout
dedication to the bishop, I have just read with such pleasure?”

“I did not write it for publication ... it was published afterwards,”
muttered Rakitin, for some reason fearfully disconcerted and almost
ashamed.

“Oh, that’s excellent! A thinker like you can, and indeed ought to,
take the widest view of every social question. Your most instructive
pamphlet has been widely circulated through the patronage of the
bishop, and has been of appreciable service.... But this is the chief
thing I should like to learn from you. You stated just now that you
were very intimately acquainted with Madame Svyetlov.” (It must be
noted that Grushenka’s surname was Svyetlov. I heard it for the first
time that day, during the case.)

“I cannot answer for all my acquaintances.... I am a young man ... and
who can be responsible for every one he meets?” cried Rakitin, flushing
all over.

“I understand, I quite understand,” cried Fetyukovitch, as though he,
too, were embarrassed and in haste to excuse himself. “You, like any
other, might well be interested in an acquaintance with a young and
beautiful woman who would readily entertain the _élite_ of the youth of
the neighborhood, but ... I only wanted to know ... It has come to my
knowledge that Madame Svyetlov was particularly anxious a couple of
months ago to make the acquaintance of the younger Karamazov, Alexey
Fyodorovitch, and promised you twenty-five roubles, if you would bring
him to her in his monastic dress. And that actually took place on the
evening of the day on which the terrible crime, which is the subject of
the present investigation, was committed. You brought Alexey Karamazov
to Madame Svyetlov, and did you receive the twenty-five roubles from
Madame Svyetlov as a reward, that’s what I wanted to hear from you?”

“It was a joke.... I don’t see of what interest that can be to you....
I took it for a joke ... meaning to give it back later....”

“Then you did take— But you have not given it back yet ... or have
you?”

“That’s of no consequence,” muttered Rakitin, “I refuse to answer such
questions.... Of course I shall give it back.”

The President intervened, but Fetyukovitch declared he had no more
questions to ask of the witness. Mr. Rakitin left the witness-box not
absolutely without a stain upon his character. The effect left by the
lofty idealism of his speech was somewhat marred, and Fetyukovitch’s
expression, as he watched him walk away, seemed to suggest to the
public “this is a specimen of the lofty-minded persons who accuse him.”
I remember that this incident, too, did not pass off without an
outbreak from Mitya. Enraged by the tone in which Rakitin had referred
to Grushenka, he suddenly shouted “Bernard!” When, after Rakitin’s
cross-examination, the President asked the prisoner if he had anything
to say, Mitya cried loudly:

“Since I’ve been arrested, he has borrowed money from me! He is a
contemptible Bernard and opportunist, and he doesn’t believe in God; he
took the bishop in!”

Mitya, of course, was pulled up again for the intemperance of his
language, but Rakitin was done for. Captain Snegiryov’s evidence was a
failure, too, but from quite a different reason. He appeared in ragged
and dirty clothes, muddy boots, and in spite of the vigilance and
expert observation of the police officers, he turned out to be
hopelessly drunk. On being asked about Mitya’s attack upon him, he
refused to answer.

“God bless him. Ilusha told me not to. God will make it up to me
yonder.”

“Who told you not to tell? Of whom are you talking?”

“Ilusha, my little son. ‘Father, father, how he insulted you!’ He said
that at the stone. Now he is dying....”

The captain suddenly began sobbing, and plumped down on his knees
before the President. He was hurriedly led away amidst the laughter of
the public. The effect prepared by the prosecutor did not come off at
all.

Fetyukovitch went on making the most of every opportunity, and amazed
people more and more by his minute knowledge of the case. Thus, for
example, Trifon Borissovitch made a great impression, of course, very
prejudicial to Mitya. He calculated almost on his fingers that on his
first visit to Mokroe, Mitya must have spent three thousand roubles,
“or very little less. Just think what he squandered on those gypsy
girls alone! And as for our lousy peasants, it wasn’t a case of
flinging half a rouble in the street, he made them presents of
twenty-five roubles each, at least, he didn’t give them less. And what
a lot of money was simply stolen from him! And if any one did steal, he
did not leave a receipt. How could one catch the thief when he was
flinging his money away all the time? Our peasants are robbers, you
know; they have no care for their souls. And the way he went on with
the girls, our village girls! They’re completely set up since then, I
tell you, they used to be poor.” He recalled, in fact, every item of
expense and added it all up. So the theory that only fifteen hundred
had been spent and the rest had been put aside in a little bag seemed
inconceivable.

“I saw three thousand as clear as a penny in his hands, I saw it with
my own eyes; I should think I ought to know how to reckon money,” cried
Trifon Borissovitch, doing his best to satisfy “his betters.”

When Fetyukovitch had to cross-examine him, he scarcely tried to refute
his evidence, but began asking him about an incident at the first
carousal at Mokroe, a month before the arrest, when Timofey and another
peasant called Akim had picked up on the floor in the passage a hundred
roubles dropped by Mitya when he was drunk, and had given them to
Trifon Borissovitch and received a rouble each from him for doing so.
“Well,” asked the lawyer, “did you give that hundred roubles back to
Mr. Karamazov?” Trifon Borissovitch shuffled in vain.... He was
obliged, after the peasants had been examined, to admit the finding of
the hundred roubles, only adding that he had religiously returned it
all to Dmitri Fyodorovitch “in perfect honesty, and it’s only because
his honor was in liquor at the time, he wouldn’t remember it.” But, as
he had denied the incident of the hundred roubles till the peasants had
been called to prove it, his evidence as to returning the money to
Mitya was naturally regarded with great suspicion. So one of the most
dangerous witnesses brought forward by the prosecution was again
discredited.

The same thing happened with the Poles. They took up an attitude of
pride and independence; they vociferated loudly that they had both been
in the service of the Crown, and that “Pan Mitya” had offered them
three thousand “to buy their honor,” and that they had seen a large sum
of money in his hands. Pan Mussyalovitch introduced a terrible number
of Polish words into his sentences, and seeing that this only increased
his consequence in the eyes of the President and the prosecutor, grew
more and more pompous, and ended by talking in Polish altogether. But
Fetyukovitch caught them, too, in his snares. Trifon Borissovitch,
recalled, was forced, in spite of his evasions, to admit that Pan
Vrublevsky had substituted another pack of cards for the one he had
provided, and that Pan Mussyalovitch had cheated during the game.
Kalganov confirmed this, and both the Poles left the witness-box with
damaged reputations, amidst laughter from the public.

Then exactly the same thing happened with almost all the most dangerous
witnesses. Fetyukovitch succeeded in casting a slur on all of them, and
dismissing them with a certain derision. The lawyers and experts were
lost in admiration, and were only at a loss to understand what good
purpose could be served by it, for all, I repeat, felt that the case
for the prosecution could not be refuted, but was growing more and more
tragically overwhelming. But from the confidence of the “great
magician” they saw that he was serene, and they waited, feeling that
“such a man” had not come from Petersburg for nothing, and that he was
not a man to return unsuccessful.




Chapter III.
The Medical Experts And A Pound Of Nuts


The evidence of the medical experts, too, was of little use to the
prisoner. And it appeared later that Fetyukovitch had not reckoned much
upon it. The medical line of defense had only been taken up through the
insistence of Katerina Ivanovna, who had sent for a celebrated doctor
from Moscow on purpose. The case for the defense could, of course, lose
nothing by it and might, with luck, gain something from it. There was,
however, an element of comedy about it, through the difference of
opinion of the doctors. The medical experts were the famous doctor from
Moscow, our doctor, Herzenstube, and the young doctor, Varvinsky. The
two latter appeared also as witnesses for the prosecution.

The first to be called in the capacity of expert was Doctor
Herzenstube. He was a gray and bald old man of seventy, of middle
height and sturdy build. He was much esteemed and respected by every
one in the town. He was a conscientious doctor and an excellent and
pious man, a Hernguter or Moravian brother, I am not quite sure which.
He had been living amongst us for many years and behaved with wonderful
dignity. He was a kind-hearted and humane man. He treated the sick poor
and peasants for nothing, visited them in their slums and huts, and
left money for medicine, but he was as obstinate as a mule. If once he
had taken an idea into his head, there was no shaking it. Almost every
one in the town was aware, by the way, that the famous doctor had,
within the first two or three days of his presence among us, uttered
some extremely offensive allusions to Doctor Herzenstube’s
qualifications. Though the Moscow doctor asked twenty-five roubles for
a visit, several people in the town were glad to take advantage of his
arrival, and rushed to consult him regardless of expense. All these
had, of course, been previously patients of Doctor Herzenstube, and the
celebrated doctor had criticized his treatment with extreme harshness.
Finally, he had asked the patients as soon as he saw them, “Well, who
has been cramming you with nostrums? Herzenstube? He, he!” Doctor
Herzenstube, of course, heard all this, and now all the three doctors
made their appearance, one after another, to be examined.

Doctor Herzenstube roundly declared that the abnormality of the
prisoner’s mental faculties was self-evident. Then giving his grounds
for this opinion, which I omit here, he added that the abnormality was
not only evident in many of the prisoner’s actions in the past, but was
apparent even now at this very moment. When he was asked to explain how
it was apparent now at this moment, the old doctor, with simple-hearted
directness, pointed out that the prisoner on entering the court had “an
extraordinary air, remarkable in the circumstances”; that he had
“marched in like a soldier, looking straight before him, though it
would have been more natural for him to look to the left where, among
the public, the ladies were sitting, seeing that he was a great admirer
of the fair sex and must be thinking much of what the ladies are saying
of him now,” the old man concluded in his peculiar language.

I must add that he spoke Russian readily, but every phrase was formed
in German style, which did not, however, trouble him, for it had always
been a weakness of his to believe that he spoke Russian perfectly,
better indeed than Russians. And he was very fond of using Russian
proverbs, always declaring that the Russian proverbs were the best and
most expressive sayings in the whole world. I may remark, too, that in
conversation, through absent-mindedness he often forgot the most
ordinary words, which sometimes went out of his head, though he knew
them perfectly. The same thing happened, though, when he spoke German,
and at such times he always waved his hand before his face as though
trying to catch the lost word, and no one could induce him to go on
speaking till he had found the missing word. His remark that the
prisoner ought to have looked at the ladies on entering roused a
whisper of amusement in the audience. All our ladies were very fond of
our old doctor; they knew, too, that having been all his life a
bachelor and a religious man of exemplary conduct, he looked upon women
as lofty creatures. And so his unexpected observation struck every one
as very queer.

The Moscow doctor, being questioned in his turn, definitely and
emphatically repeated that he considered the prisoner’s mental
condition abnormal in the highest degree. He talked at length and with
erudition of “aberration” and “mania,” and argued that, from all the
facts collected, the prisoner had undoubtedly been in a condition of
aberration for several days before his arrest, and, if the crime had
been committed by him, it must, even if he were conscious of it, have
been almost involuntary, as he had not the power to control the