 it was simply charming. ‘Give me back my nose!’ he said, and
he beat his breast. ‘My son,’ said the priest evasively, ‘all things
are accomplished in accordance with the inscrutable decrees of
Providence, and what seems a misfortune sometimes leads to
extraordinary, though unapparent, benefits. If stern destiny has
deprived you of your nose, it’s to your advantage that no one can ever
pull you by your nose.’ ‘Holy father, that’s no comfort,’ cried the
despairing marquis. ‘I’d be delighted to have my nose pulled every day
of my life, if it were only in its proper place.’ ‘My son,’ sighs the
priest, ‘you can’t expect every blessing at once. This is murmuring
against Providence, who even in this has not forgotten you, for if you
repine as you repined just now, declaring you’d be glad to have your
nose pulled for the rest of your life, your desire has already been
fulfilled indirectly, for when you lost your nose, you were led by the
nose.’”

“Fool, how stupid!” cried Ivan.

“My dear friend, I only wanted to amuse you. But I swear that’s the
genuine Jesuit casuistry and I swear that it all happened word for word
as I’ve told you. It happened lately and gave me a great deal of
trouble. The unhappy young man shot himself that very night when he got
home. I was by his side till the very last moment. Those Jesuit
confessionals are really my most delightful diversion at melancholy
moments. Here’s another incident that happened only the other day. A
little blonde Norman girl of twenty—a buxom, unsophisticated beauty
that would make your mouth water—comes to an old priest. She bends down
and whispers her sin into the grating. ‘Why, my daughter, have you
fallen again already?’ cries the priest. ‘O Sancta Maria, what do I
hear! Not the same man this time, how long is this going on? Aren’t you
ashamed!’ ‘_Ah, mon père_,’ answers the sinner with tears of penitence,
‘_ça lui fait tant de plaisir, et à moi si peu de peine!_’ Fancy, such
an answer! I drew back. It was the cry of nature, better than innocence
itself, if you like. I absolved her sin on the spot and was turning to
go, but I was forced to turn back. I heard the priest at the grating
making an appointment with her for the evening—though he was an old man
hard as flint, he fell in an instant! It was nature, the truth of
nature asserted its rights! What, you are turning up your nose again?
Angry again? I don’t know how to please you—”

“Leave me alone, you are beating on my brain like a haunting
nightmare,” Ivan moaned miserably, helpless before his apparition. “I
am bored with you, agonizingly and insufferably. I would give anything
to be able to shake you off!”

“I repeat, moderate your expectations, don’t demand of me ‘everything
great and noble’ and you’ll see how well we shall get on,” said the
gentleman impressively. “You are really angry with me for not having
appeared to you in a red glow, with thunder and lightning, with
scorched wings, but have shown myself in such a modest form. You are
wounded, in the first place, in your esthetic feelings, and, secondly,
in your pride. How could such a vulgar devil visit such a great man as
you! Yes, there is that romantic strain in you, that was so derided by
Byelinsky. I can’t help it, young man, as I got ready to come to you I
did think as a joke of appearing in the figure of a retired general who
had served in the Caucasus, with a star of the Lion and the Sun on my
coat. But I was positively afraid of doing it, for you’d have thrashed
me for daring to pin the Lion and the Sun on my coat, instead of, at
least, the Polar Star or the Sirius. And you keep on saying I am
stupid, but, mercy on us! I make no claim to be equal to you in
intelligence. Mephistopheles declared to Faust that he desired evil,
but did only good. Well, he can say what he likes, it’s quite the
opposite with me. I am perhaps the one man in all creation who loves
the truth and genuinely desires good. I was there when the Word, Who
died on the Cross, rose up into heaven bearing on His bosom the soul of
the penitent thief. I heard the glad shrieks of the cherubim singing
and shouting hosannah and the thunderous rapture of the seraphim which
shook heaven and all creation, and I swear to you by all that’s sacred,
I longed to join the choir and shout hosannah with them all. The word
had almost escaped me, had almost broken from my lips ... you know how
susceptible and esthetically impressionable I am. But common sense—oh,
a most unhappy trait in my character—kept me in due bounds and I let
the moment pass! For what would have happened, I reflected, what would
have happened after my hosannah? Everything on earth would have been
extinguished at once and no events could have occurred. And so, solely
from a sense of duty and my social position, I was forced to suppress
the good moment and to stick to my nasty task. Somebody takes all the
credit of what’s good for Himself, and nothing but nastiness is left
for me. But I don’t envy the honor of a life of idle imposture, I am
not ambitious. Why am I, of all creatures in the world, doomed to be
cursed by all decent people and even to be kicked, for if I put on
mortal form I am bound to take such consequences sometimes? I know, of
course, there’s a secret in it, but they won’t tell me the secret for
anything, for then perhaps, seeing the meaning of it, I might bawl
hosannah, and the indispensable minus would disappear at once, and good
sense would reign supreme throughout the whole world. And that, of
course, would mean the end of everything, even of magazines and
newspapers, for who would take them in? I know that at the end of all
things I shall be reconciled. I, too, shall walk my quadrillion and
learn the secret. But till that happens I am sulking and fulfill my
destiny though it’s against the grain—that is, to ruin thousands for
the sake of saving one. How many souls have had to be ruined and how
many honorable reputations destroyed for the sake of that one righteous
man, Job, over whom they made such a fool of me in old days! Yes, till
the secret is revealed, there are two sorts of truths for me—one, their
truth, yonder, which I know nothing about so far, and the other my own.
And there’s no knowing which will turn out the better.... Are you
asleep?”

“I might well be,” Ivan groaned angrily. “All my stupid ideas—outgrown,
thrashed out long ago, and flung aside like a dead carcass—you present
to me as something new!”

“There’s no pleasing you! And I thought I should fascinate you by my
literary style. That hosannah in the skies really wasn’t bad, was it?
And then that ironical tone _à la_ Heine, eh?”

“No, I was never such a flunkey! How then could my soul beget a flunkey
like you?”

“My dear fellow, I know a most charming and attractive young Russian
gentleman, a young thinker and a great lover of literature and art, the
author of a promising poem entitled _The Grand Inquisitor_. I was only
thinking of him!”

“I forbid you to speak of _The Grand Inquisitor_,” cried Ivan, crimson
with shame.

“And the _Geological Cataclysm_. Do you remember? That was a poem,
now!”

“Hold your tongue, or I’ll kill you!”

“You’ll kill me? No, excuse me, I will speak. I came to treat myself to
that pleasure. Oh, I love the dreams of my ardent young friends,
quivering with eagerness for life! ‘There are new men,’ you decided
last spring, when you were meaning to come here, ‘they propose to
destroy everything and begin with cannibalism. Stupid fellows! they
didn’t ask my advice! I maintain that nothing need be destroyed, that
we only need to destroy the idea of God in man, that’s how we have to
set to work. It’s that, that we must begin with. Oh, blind race of men
who have no understanding! As soon as men have all of them denied
God—and I believe that period, analogous with geological periods, will
come to pass—the old conception of the universe will fall of itself
without cannibalism, and, what’s more, the old morality, and everything
will begin anew. Men will unite to take from life all it can give, but
only for joy and happiness in the present world. Man will be lifted up
with a spirit of divine Titanic pride and the man-god will appear.
From hour to hour extending his conquest of nature infinitely by his
will and his science, man will feel such lofty joy from hour to hour in
doing it that it will make up for all his old dreams of the joys of
heaven. Every one will know that he is mortal and will accept death
proudly and serenely like a god. His pride will teach him that it’s
useless for him to repine at life’s being a moment, and he will love
his brother without need of reward. Love will be sufficient only for a
moment of life, but the very consciousness of its momentariness will
intensify its fire, which now is dissipated in dreams of eternal love
beyond the grave’... and so on and so on in the same style. Charming!”

Ivan sat with his eyes on the floor, and his hands pressed to his ears,
but he began trembling all over. The voice continued.

“The question now is, my young thinker reflected, is it possible that
such a period will ever come? If it does, everything is determined and
humanity is settled for ever. But as, owing to man’s inveterate
stupidity, this cannot come about for at least a thousand years, every
one who recognizes the truth even now may legitimately order his life
as he pleases, on the new principles. In that sense, ‘all things are
lawful’ for him. What’s more, even if this period never comes to pass,
since there is anyway no God and no immortality, the new man may well
become the man-god, even if he is the only one in the whole world, and
promoted to his new position, he may lightheartedly overstep all the
barriers of the old morality of the old slave-man, if necessary. There
is no law for God. Where God stands, the place is holy. Where I stand
will be at once the foremost place ... ‘all things are lawful’ and
that’s the end of it! That’s all very charming; but if you want to
swindle why do you want a moral sanction for doing it? But that’s our
modern Russian all over. He can’t bring himself to swindle without a
moral sanction. He is so in love with truth—”

The visitor talked, obviously carried away by his own eloquence,
speaking louder and louder and looking ironically at his host. But he
did not succeed in finishing; Ivan suddenly snatched a glass from the
table and flung it at the orator.

“_Ah, mais c’est bête enfin_,” cried the latter, jumping up from the
sofa and shaking the drops of tea off himself. “He remembers Luther’s
inkstand! He takes me for a dream and throws glasses at a dream! It’s
like a woman! I suspected you were only pretending to stop up your
ears.”

A loud, persistent knocking was suddenly heard at the window. Ivan
jumped up from the sofa.

“Do you hear? You’d better open,” cried the visitor; “it’s your brother
Alyosha with the most interesting and surprising news, I’ll be bound!”

“Be silent, deceiver, I knew it was Alyosha, I felt he was coming, and
of course he has not come for nothing; of course he brings ‘news,’”
Ivan exclaimed frantically.

“Open, open to him. There’s a snowstorm and he is your brother.
_Monsieur sait-il le temps qu’il fait? C’est à ne pas mettre un chien
dehors_.”

The knocking continued. Ivan wanted to rush to the window, but
something seemed to fetter his arms and legs. He strained every effort
to break his chains, but in vain. The knocking at the window grew
louder and louder. At last the chains were broken and Ivan leapt up
from the sofa. He looked round him wildly. Both candles had almost
burnt out, the glass he had just thrown at his visitor stood before him
on the table, and there was no one on the sofa opposite. The knocking
on the window frame went on persistently, but it was by no means so
loud as it had seemed in his dream; on the contrary, it was quite
subdued.

“It was not a dream! No, I swear it was not a dream, it all happened
just now!” cried Ivan. He rushed to the window and opened the movable
pane.

“Alyosha, I told you not to come,” he cried fiercely to his brother.
“In two words, what do you want? In two words, do you hear?”

“An hour ago Smerdyakov hanged himself,” Alyosha answered from the
yard.

“Come round to the steps, I’ll open at once,” said Ivan, going to open
the door to Alyosha.




Chapter X.
“It Was He Who Said That”


Alyosha coming in told Ivan that a little over an hour ago Marya
Kondratyevna had run to his rooms and informed him Smerdyakov had taken
his own life. “I went in to clear away the samovar and he was hanging
on a nail in the wall.” On Alyosha’s inquiring whether she had informed
the police, she answered that she had told no one, “but I flew straight
to you, I’ve run all the way.” She seemed perfectly crazy, Alyosha
reported, and was shaking like a leaf. When Alyosha ran with her to the
cottage, he found Smerdyakov still hanging. On the table lay a note: “I
destroy my life of my own will and desire, so as to throw no blame on
any one.” Alyosha left the note on the table and went straight to the
police captain and told him all about it. “And from him I’ve come
straight to you,” said Alyosha, in conclusion, looking intently into
Ivan’s face. He had not taken his eyes off him while he told his story,
as though struck by something in his expression.

“Brother,” he cried suddenly, “you must be terribly ill. You look and
don’t seem to understand what I tell you.”

“It’s a good thing you came,” said Ivan, as though brooding, and not
hearing Alyosha’s exclamation. “I knew he had hanged himself.”

“From whom?”

“I don’t know. But I knew. Did I know? Yes, he told me. He told me so
just now.”

Ivan stood in the middle of the room, and still spoke in the same
brooding tone, looking at the ground.

“Who is _he_?” asked Alyosha, involuntarily looking round.

“He’s slipped away.”

Ivan raised his head and smiled softly.

“He was afraid of you, of a dove like you. You are a ‘pure cherub.’
Dmitri calls you a cherub. Cherub!... the thunderous rapture of the
seraphim. What are seraphim? Perhaps a whole constellation. But perhaps
that constellation is only a chemical molecule. There’s a constellation
of the Lion and the Sun. Don’t you know it?”

“Brother, sit down,” said Alyosha in alarm. “For goodness’ sake, sit
down on the sofa! You are delirious; put your head on the pillow,
that’s right. Would you like a wet towel on your head? Perhaps it will
do you good.”

“Give me the towel: it’s here on the chair. I just threw it down
there.”

“It’s not here. Don’t worry yourself. I know where it is—here,” said
Alyosha, finding a clean towel, folded up and unused, by Ivan’s
dressing-table in the other corner of the room. Ivan looked strangely
at the towel: recollection seemed to come back to him for an instant.

“Stay”—he got up from the sofa—“an hour ago I took that new towel from
there and wetted it. I wrapped it round my head and threw it down here
... How is it it’s dry? There was no other.”

“You put that towel on your head?” asked Alyosha.

“Yes, and walked up and down the room an hour ago ... Why have the
candles burnt down so? What’s the time?”

“Nearly twelve.”

“No, no, no!” Ivan cried suddenly. “It was not a dream. He was here; he
was sitting here, on that sofa. When you knocked at the window, I threw
a glass at him ... this one. Wait a minute. I was asleep last time, but
this dream was not a dream. It has happened before. I have dreams now,
Alyosha ... yet they are not dreams, but reality. I walk about, talk
and see ... though I am asleep. But he was sitting here, on that sofa
there.... He is frightfully stupid, Alyosha, frightfully stupid.” Ivan
laughed suddenly and began pacing about the room.

“Who is stupid? Of whom are you talking, brother?” Alyosha asked
anxiously again.

“The devil! He’s taken to visiting me. He’s been here twice, almost
three times. He taunted me with being angry at his being a simple devil
and not Satan, with scorched wings, in thunder and lightning. But he is
not Satan: that’s a lie. He is an impostor. He is simply a devil—a
paltry, trivial devil. He goes to the baths. If you undressed him,
you’d be sure to find he had a tail, long and smooth like a Danish
dog’s, a yard long, dun color.... Alyosha, you are cold. You’ve been in
the snow. Would you like