Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non- commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 



Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : / /books . qooqle . com/ 



y Google 



Digitized by Google 



DEVOTION 

TO THE 

SACRED HEART OF JESUS. 

By FATHER JOHN CROISET, 

Of the Society of Jesus. ^ 



Translated from the Italian. 



LONDON : 

BURNS & LAMBERT, 17 & 18, PORTMAN STREET, 
PORTMAN SQUARE. 

1863. 



Digitized by Google 



Imprimatur, 

Westmon., die 22 Maji. 1863. 

N. CARD. WISEMAN. 




Digitized by Google 



THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE. 



The deep and extraordinary interest taken by so 
many, in the devotion to the Sacred Heart of our 
Lord Jesus* Christ, the great fruits it has pro- 
duced, and the singular esteem entertained for it, 
by persons of universally recognized merit, have 
led to the publication of this book. It is intended 
to instruct the faithful, and satisfy their pious 
desires. There might, perhaps, have been some 
reason to fear, at the very outset, that the mere 
title of Devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
Christ, however it might attract many persons to 
read this book, might also deter many others. 
Arrested by the first words, they might be led to 
form an inaccurate idea of the devotion. To 
remove this difficulty, it has been thought well to 
explain in the beginning, what is understood by 
devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ. 
Experience has proved, that there is no one, who, 
after seeing in what it consists, does not agree, 
that it is reasonable, solid, and most useful, for 
our salvation, as well as for our perfection. 



Digitized by Google 



IV 



PREFACE. 



In the first part, are developed the motives, 
which should attract us to this devotion. In the 
second, are given the means of acquiring it. In 
the third, the practice of the Devotion is ex- 
plained, and some of the exercises supplied, which 
are suited to it. And since the Devotion may be 
wholly reduced, to the perfect love of Jesus Christ, 
especially in the Adorable Eucharist ; this perfect 
love is treated of, throughout the whole eourse of 
the work. The reason why the visit to the Blessed 
Sacrament, the august Sacrifice of our Altars, and 
Holy Communion, are spoken of at greater length, 
is, because, of all exercises of piety, there are 
none which bring us nearer to Jesus Christ, none 
more adapted to honour His Sacred Heart, and to 
inflame ours with an ardent love of Him. 

It is hoped that the reflections here made, will 
help to convince many, of the reasons for practising 
these holy exercises, and teach them at the same 
time how to practise them with fruit. A portrait 
is then drawn of a soul that truly loves Jesus 
Christ, with a view of giving a true idea of real 
and solid piety. 

The method of practising this Devotion is then 
given, by means of suitable exercises ; and the 
work is closed by Meditations adapted to the 
Devotion. Those who know the singular merit 
and exalted virtue of Father La ColombiSre, and 
are aware that Almighty God especially selected 
him, to promote the Devotion to the Sacred Heart 
of Jesus, will be glad to find in various parts of 
this book, the thoughts and sentiments of this 
great servant of Jesus Christ upon this Devotion. 

To lead Christians to the practice of this Devo- 



Digitized by Google 



PREFACE. 



V 



don, it is unnecessary to adduce either autho- 
rities, revelations, or examples. It is enough to 
know, that it tends wholly to the .perfect love 
of Jesus Christ. It has been thought well, 
however, to cite, in two or three parts of this 
book, such things as are found in the revelations 
of St. Gertrude and St. Mechtildis, bearing upon 
this- Devotion. It would be nothing short of pre- 
varication, were we to abstain, through fear of 
being considered too credulous, from pointing out 
the wonderful means, which Almighty God has 
made use of latterly, to renew the practice of this 
Devotion amongst the faithful. It cannot be 
denied, without condemning the sentiments of the 
entire Church, that there have existed at all times, 
pure and chosen souls, to whom God communi- 
cates Himself intimately. Although indeed, in- 
stances of this divine condescension and familiarity 
are most rare, nevertheless, there is not a century 
that does not furnish us with examples of it in 
some Saint. Those who have never received 
such favours, says St. Teresa, have sometimes 
a difficulty in believing in these extraordinary 
gifts : (St. Teresa in her Life, ch, 26.) But they 
should remember, that if, it be credulity to believe 
everything on such a subject, it is on the other 
hand, temerity to believe nothing. It is well here 
to state, that the revelations of St. Gertrude and of 
St Mechtildis, which we have quoted two or three 
times in this book, were examined by all the learned 

{ersons, who were then in Flanders, in France, in 
taly, in Germany, and in the most celebrated 
universities. All were unanimous in asserting 
that they were full of the spirit of God, and that 



Digitized by Google 



vi 



PREFACE. 



He alone was the author of them. Learned 
Prelates and great Saints have esteemed and ap- 
proved them. They have been cited with praise 
by celebrated Doctors. One of them has asserted, 
that, after the examination which has been made 
of them, he did not think, that a man of true 
wisdom and solid virtue, could fail to esteem 
them * 

The Spiritual Retreat of F. La Colombi&re has 
already made many pious souls acquainted, with 
the wonderful means, which Almighty God 
has employed, to inspire this Devotion. ±$ut, the 
person of whom that great servant of God speaks, 
€€ to whom" he says, " our Lord, communicates 
Himself most intimately,** took always especial 
care to lead an obscure and hidden Me, though 
honoured by God with those extraordinary graces, 
which we read of with admiration, in the fives of 
the greatest saints. We therefore exhort our 
readers to read the life of Sister Margaret 
Alacoque, Religious of the Visitation, by Mon- 
seigneur Languet, Bishop of Soissons, one of the 
greatest and most learned Prelates, that France 
has produced in these times. It was translated 

* Revelations prcediciis Fceminis facta toti Orbi inno- 
tuerunt, et a pits, eruditisque viris jam olim fuerunt appro- 
Data ; nam, et Sancti Patres passim eas citant in scriptis et 
Hbris mis .... Revelationes sanctce Gertrudis ante et 
post mortem ipsius fuerunt a doctissimis, eruditissimisque 
viris summa cum diUgentia examinaUz, quorum unus post 
occur atam illarum lectionem, scripsit sententiam hoc modo: 
Ego, inquit, in veritate divini luminis sentio, neminem qui Dei 
Spiritu sit iUustratus, posse calumniari, aut impugnare ea 
qua in hoc libro habentur, nam et Catholica sunt, et Sancta. 
Bios, Concl. Arum, fidel. C. 4. § 5. de Authent. Bevelation. 



Digitized by Google 



PREFACE. 



vii 



into Italian and printed at Venice. It will be 
seen in the person of that most virtuous virgin, 
that the arm of the Lord is not shortened, and 
that, even if it were true that the present age is 
(as some not very devout minds wish to persuade 
themselves) an age of no miracles, at all events 
there is not any age of the Church, in which great 
Saints do not appear. 



y Google 



NOTICE. 



For the greater convenience of those who may use 
this book, it has been thought well to place all the 
Meditations at the end. Some ejaculatory prayers are 
appended to them. They may be employed to feed 
devotion during the day, according to the different 
necessities of different persons. They are taken from 
the Soliloquies, the Meditations, and the Manual of 
St. Augustin, and also from the works of St. Teresa. 



Digitized by Google 



DEVOTION TO THE 



FIRST PART.— MOTIVES. 



Chapteb I. 

What is meant by Devotion to the Sacred Heart of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, and in what it consists. 

The particular object of this devotion is the immense 
love of the Son of God, which has induced Him to die 
for us, and to give Himself wholly to us in the Adorable 
Sacrament of the Altar, and this, although He foresaw 
all the ingratitude and outrages which He was to meet 
with in this state of a victim immolated till the end of 
ages ; preferring rather to expose himself daily to the 
insults and contempt of mankind, than to fail in show- 
ing us, by the greatest of all wonders, to what an excess 
He loves us. 

This is what has enkindled the piety and zeal of 
many. Reflecting on the little gratitude that is shown 
for such an excess of love, the little love that is felt for 
Jesus Christ, and the little value that is set upon His 
love for us, they have been unable to endure to see 



Digitized by Google 



2 



FIR8T PART. 



Him daily so ill-treated, without protesting to Him 
their just grief and their excessive desire to repair, as 
far as they can, so much ingratitude and contempt, by 
their ardent love, by their profound respect, and by 
every sort of homage in their power. It is with this 
intention that certain days in the year have been chosen 
in order to make a more special recognition of the ex- 
cessive love of Jesus Christ for us in the adorable 
Sacrament ; and at the same time, to make Him some 
reparation of honour for all the indignities and all the 
contempt which He has received, and still receives 
daily, in this mystery of love. And certainly, this grief 
at the sight of the little love shown to Jesus Christ 
in this adorable mystery, this intense sorrow at seeing 
Him so ill-treated, these practices of devotion which 
are suggested by love alone, and which have no other 
aim but to repair, as far as possible, the outrages He 
there endures, are, without doubt, real proofs of an 
ardent love for Jesus Christ, and visible signs of a just 
gratitude. 

It is easy to see that the object and principal motive 
of this devotion is, as we have already said, the immense 
love which Jesus Christ has for men, whilst they for 
the most part feel only contempt, or at least indifference, 
for Him. 

The end we have in view is, first, to acknowledge 
and honour, as far as we are able, by our frequent 
adorations, by a return of love, by our thanksgivings, 
and by every sort of homage, the sentiments of love 
and tenderness which Jesus Christ has for us, in the 
adorable Eucharist, where He is so little known to 
men, or at least, so little loved, even by those who do 
know Him. 

In the second place, we aim at repairing, by every 
means possible, the insults and outrages to which His 
love exposed Him, in the course of His mortal life, and 
to which the same love exposes Him still every day, in 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER I. 



8 



the most holy Sacrament of the Altar. So that this 
devotion wholly consists, properly speaking, in an 
ardent love of Jesus Christ, constantly residing amongst 
us in the adorable Eucharist, and in testifying this 
ardent love by our grief at seeing Him so little loved 
and so little honoured, and by the means we take to 
repair this contempt and this want of love. 

But as we always require, in the practice even of the 
most spiritual devotions, certain material and sensible 
objects, which, by the strong impression they make 
upon us, engage our attention, and thus facilitate the 
exercise of these devotions, the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
has been chosen, as the sensible object that is most 
worthy of our respect, and the best suited at the same 
time to the end we have in view in this devotion. 

Indeed, even if there had been no special reason for 
giving to these pious practices the name of Devotion 
to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, it would seem that 
nothing could better express the peculiar character of 
this devotion. For it is, in fact, but an exercise of 
divine love. Love is its object; love is its principal 
motive ; and love is the end at which it aims. The 
heart of man, says St. Thomas, is in a manner 
the source and seat of love. Its natural movements 
follow and imitate the, affections of the mind, and con- 
tribute not a little, by their strength or weakness, to 
foment or assuage its passions. It is on this account 
that the most tender sentiments of the soul are gene- 
rally attributed to the heart. It is this also that makes 
the hearts of the Saints an object of such singular 
veneration. 

From all that has been said, it is easy to understand 
what is meant by devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. 
It means an ardent love for Jesus Christ at the remem- 
brance of all the wonders He has wrought, to testify 
His love, especially in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, 
which is indeed the miracle of His love. It means a 

b 2 



Digitized by Google 



4 



FIRST PABT. 



lively grief at the sight of the outrages committed by 
men against Jesus Christ in this adorable mystery. It 
means an ardent desire to omit nothing in order to 
make reparation, in every way we can, for all these 
insults. This is what is understood by devotion to the 
Sacred Heart of our Lord Jesus Christ. This is what 
it principally consists in, not exclusively, as some 
perhaps have supposed, in the loving and specially 
honouring that Heart of flesh, like our own, which forms 
a part of the adorable Body of Jesus Christ. Not that 
the Sacred Heart does not merit our adoration. It is 
enough to say that it is the Heart of Jesus Christ. If 
His Body and His precious Blood deserve all our 
respect, who does not see that His Sacred Heart claims 
our homage even more particularly? If we feel a devotion 
towards His Sacred Wounds, how much more powerfully 
should we be inflamed with devotion towards His Sacred 
Heart ? This Divine Heart, r egarded as a part of the 
adorable Body of Jesus Christ, is, properly speaking, 
the material object of this devotion. The immense 
love which Jesus Christ bears towards us is its form 
or motive principle. Now, as this love is purely spi- 
ritual, it was impossible that it could come under the 
cognizance of the senses. It was therefore necessary 
to find a symbol to express it. What more appropriate 
or more natural symbol of love could be found than the 
real Heart of Jesus ? 

It is for the same reason that the Church, when she 
wishes to give us a sensible representation of the suffer- 
ings of the Son of God, which are no less spiritual than 
His love, gives us the image of His Sacred Wounds. 
So that, as devotion to the Sacred Wounds is, in 
truth, a devotion to Jesus in his sufferings, so the 
devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus is, in truth, a 
more affectionate and more ardent devotion towards 
Jesus Christ in the adorable Sacrament, in considera- 
tion of the immense love He there testifies towards us, 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER I. 



5 



and with the intention of making reparation for the 
contempt which is manifested towards it. Assuredly, 
the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ hears as close a rela- 
tion, at least, to His love, as the Sacred Wounds hear 
to His sufferings. Now, if there has ever existed, in 
every age, so great a devotion to the Sacred Wounds of 
Jesus Christ, and if the Church, in her wish to inspire 
all her children with the love of Jesus Christ, con- 
tinually places these Sacred Wounds before their eyes, 
how powerful necessarily must be the effect of the 
remembrance and representation of His Sacred Heart ? 

It will be seen, in the course of this work, that this 
devotion is not new, and that its practice is confirmed 
by the example of many great Saints. It has been 
sanctioned by various privileges. Clement X., by a 
Bull dated the 4th of October, 1674, granted great In- 
dulgences to an association of the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus, in the Church of the Seminary at Constances, 
consecrated in honour of the Sacred Heart. Inno- 
cent XII. granted, by a special Brief, a plenary Indul- 
gence in favour of the devotion to the Sacred Heart. * 

It is not necessary to adduce here the numerous 
reasons which prove the solidity of this devotion. It 
is enough to say that the love which Jesus Christ has 
for us, and of which he gives us so marvellous a proof 
in the adorable Eucharist, is its principal motive ; that 
to make reparation for the contempt with which this 
love has been treated is the principal end to which it 
is directed ; that the Sacred Heart of Jesus, all on fire 
with this love, is its sensible object, and that a most 
ardent and tender love for the person of Jesus Christ 
ought to be its fruit. 

* The reigning Pontiff, Clement XIII M at the request of 
many dioceses, provinces, and kingdoms, has allowed the feast 
to be celebrated with a proper Mass and Office. The devotion 
has in consequence rapidly spread over almost all Catholic 
countries. 



Digitized by Google 



6 



FIRST PART. 



Chapter II. 

The means employed by Almighty God to promote this 
devotion. 

Father la Colombiere, of the Society of Jesus, was 
one of the first whom Almighty God made use of to draw 
the faithful to this devotion. This great Servant of God 
was more illustrious for his glorious character of Con- 
fessor of Jesus Christ in England, than for the dis- 
tinguished post which he held of Preacher to her 
Royal Highness the Duchess of York, now Queen of 
Great Britain. He is celebrated for his works, in 
which he unites solidity with elegance, and elegance 
with unction. But he is still more esteemed^for his 
exalted virtue. He had hound himself by an express 
vow to aspire to it continually, and he attained to it in 
so short a time as to secure the admiration of all 
Catholics who knew him, and even of heretics. This 
great Servant of God conceived at once so true an idea 
of the solidity and importance of this devotion, and 
received from God such great graces by means of these 
holy practices, that he thought himself obliged to neg- 
lect nothing to make known this treasure, which belongs 
indeed to all, but which is known only to few. Let us 
hear what he has written on the subject himself in the 
Journal of his Spiritual Retreats, which he made in 
London, and the notes of which were published after 
his death. 

" At the close of this Retreat," he says, " full of con- 
fidence in the mercy of God, I have resolved to procure, 
by every means possible, the execution of what was 
prescribed to me by my Adorable Master, regarding 
His most precious Body in the most holy Sacrament of 
the Altar, where I believe Him really and truly present. 
Full of the consolations which I receive and enjoy from 
the mercy of my God, though I cannot explain what 



Digitized by GoOglc 



CHAPTER IT. 



7 



they are, I have understood that Almighty God desired 
that I should serve Him, by procuring the accomplish- 
ment of His holy designs with regard to the devotion 
which He has suggested to a person to whom He com- 
municates Himself very intimately, and for whose 
benefit He has been pleased to make use of my weak- 
ness. I have already inspired many persons in England 
with it, and I have written about it to France, and have 
begged a friend of mine to make it known where he is. 
It will be very useful there, and the number of chosen 
souls that are to be found in that Community makes 
me believe that its practice in that holy house will be 
very agreeable to God. Why cannot I, oh my God ! be 
everywhere, and publish what Thou expectest from Thy 
servants and friends ? 

" Almighty God having manifested His designs to 
the person who, there is reason to believe, is according 
to His heart, from the great graces He has granted her, 
she consulted me regarding them, and I obliged her to 
put in writing what she had said to me. This I have 
myself written in the Journal of my Retreats, since 
Almighty God has deigned to make use of my weakness 
in the execution of this design. 

" Being before the Blessed Sacrament," says this holy 
soul, " one day during the Octave of Corpus Christi, I 
received from God excessive marks of His love. As I 
felt moved with the desire of making Him some return 
and giving love for love, He said to me: ' Thou canst 
not make me a better return than by doing what I 
have so often asked of thee.' And disclosing to me 
His Divine Heart, 'Behold this Heart/ He said, ' which 
has loved men so much, and has spared nothing, even 
to consuming Itself, in order to show them Its love ; 
and in return, I receive nothing but ingratitude from 
the greater number through the contempt, the irrever- 
ence, the sacrileges, and the coldness shown towards 
me in this Sacrament of love. But, what is more 



Digitized by Google 



8 



FIRST PART. 



painful to me is, that these are hearts which are con- 
secrated to Me. I therefore ask of thee, that the first 
Friday after the Octave of the Blessed Sacrament be 
dedicated to a particular festival in honour of My Heart, 
to make It a reparation of honour by an act of atone- 
ment, and by communicating on that day, in order to 
repair the indignities which It has received during the 
time of exposition on the Altars ; and I promise thee 
that my Heart shall dilate Itself to pour abundantly 
the influences of Its divine love upon those who shall 
render It this honour.' 

" But, oh Lord, why dost Thou address Thyself," 
said this person to Him, " to so miserable a creature, 
to so poor a sinner, that by her unworthiness she is 
calculated to hinder the accomplishment of Thy design, 
when Thou hast so many generous souls to execute 
Thy desires?" 

u ' Dost thou not know/ He said, • that I make use of 
the weakest subjects to confound the strong ? that it is 
generally in the most insignificant and the poor in 
spirit that I manifest my power, in order that they may 
attribute nothing to themselves ? ' 

" Grant me then," I said to Him, " the means of 
doing what Thou commandest." 

" He then added : « Go to my servant N. and tell 
him from Me, that he must do all in his power to estab- 
lish this devotion, and to give this satisfaction to My 
Divine Heart. That he must not lose courage at the 
difficulties he will meet with, for they will not be 
wanting. But he must bear in mind, that those who 
wholly distrust themselves, and confide entirely in me, 
are all-powerful.' " 

F. la Colombiere was a person of very nice discern- 
ment, and was not one who would believe anything 
lightly. But he had received too clear a proof of the 
exalted and solid virtue of the person that spoke to 
him to fear the least illusion in this matter. He there- 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



9 



fore immediately set himself to the work which Al- 
mighty God had entrusted to him. But in order to 
accomplish it in the best manner that he could, he 
began it in his own person. He consecrated himself 
entirely to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. He offered to 
It everything in himself that he thought capable of 
honouring and pleasing It. The extraordinary graces 
which he received from this practice soon confirmed 
him in the idea he had formed of the importance and 
solidity of this devotion. No sooner did he begin to 
meditate on the tender love which Jesus Christ enter- 
tains for us in the Blessed Sacrament, where His sacred 
Heart is ever burning with love for men, and ever open 
to pour out upon them every kind of grace and bene- 
diction, than he felt deep grief at the thought of the 
horrible outrages which Jesus Christ has endured 
therein for so long a time from the malice of heretics, 
and from the extraordinary indifference which the 
greater number even of Catholics show for Jesus Christ 
in this august Sacrament. He was deeply moved at 
the remembrance of this forgetfulness, this contempt, 
and these outrages, and he was constrained to conse- 
crate himself anew to the Sacred Heart, by that beau- 
tiful prayer which he calls An Offering to the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus. This prayer will be found at the end 
of this book. The departure of the Servant of God to 
England, his imprisonment, and the short time he 
survived his return to France, did not allow him to 
publish more regarding it. But God has not left His 
work imperfect. He himself inspired this devotion, 
which, as he had made known to St. Gertrude (Life 
of St. Gertrude, book iv. c. 4), He especially reserved 
for these latter times, in order to arouse by these means 
the tepidity and sloth of the faithful. By means of a 
little book composed as it were by chance, without art, 
without study, and without design, He has inspired 
with this devotion even persons who had never appre- 



Digitized by Google 



10 



FIR8T . PART. 



ciated it, and who, at one time, without knowing in 
what it consisted, had thrown discredit upon it. Al- 
mighty God has made use of these persons in particular 
to diffuse it almost universally. 

In less than a year then was this devotion happily 
established. The wisest directors, Doctors, and Pre- 
lates have pronounced its eulogium. Preachers have 
successfully inculcated it. Chapels have been erected 
in honour of the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ Pictures 
of It have been painted and engraved. Altars have 
been raised to It. The nuns of the Visitation, who, 
animated with the spirit of their holy Founder, have 
been the most zealous, or at least the first, in this 
undertaking, have had the consolation of hearing the 
Mass composed in honour of the Sacred Heart solemnly 
sung at Dijon, in the chapel which they have built to 
the Sacred Heart of Jesus* Their example has been 
followed with the greatest benefit by many other nuns. 
This solid devotion has spread and established itself 
with marvellous success over almost the whole of 
France. It has been carried into foreign kingdoms. It 
has passed even beyond the seas. It has been founded 
at Quebec, and has already penetrated by the help of 
missionaries into Syria, the Indies, and even China. 
In a word, the universal approbation this devotion has 
met with, the esteem entertained for it by persons of 
universally recognized merit and virtue, give us reason 
to hope that in future Jesus Christ will be less forgotten, 
better served, and much more loved. 

Chapter HE. 

How just and reasonable is the devotion to the Sacred 
Heart of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

The reasons which enforce the love of Jesus Christ are 
above any mere sentiment. Souls relish them accord- 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER III. 



11 



ing to their progress in grace. It seems as though to 
wish to seek the motives that should lead us to love 
Jesus Christ is, either to forget what we are, or to 
believe that we do not know who He is. 

It might then appear useless to hring forward here 
the motives which should incline us to the devotion to 
the Sacred Heart of Jesus. This devotion is itself an 
exercise of the love we ought to have for Jesus Christ. 
But as all men are not always in the same dispositions, 
and grace is not always equal in all men, I have thought 
it well to make at least a few reflections on the three 
principal motives. They should be sufficient to convince 
any reasonable man. 

We shall show in this and the two following chapters. 
1. How just and reasonable is the devotion to the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus. 2. How useful it is both for 
our salvation and perfection. 3. What true sweetness 
there is in this devotion. In fact, whether we consider 
the sensible object of this devotion, which is the sacred 
Heart of Jesus, or confine ourselves to the principal 
and spiritual object, which is the immense love of 
Jesus Christ for men, with what respect, gratitude, 
and love should we not be filled ! 

I. The excellence of the adorable Heart of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

The Heart of Jesus is holy with the sanctity of God 
Himself. Hence it follows, that all the movements of 
His Heart, owing to the dignity of the Person from 
whom they proceed, are actions of infinite price and 
value. For they are the actions of God Incarnate. It 
is therefore just that the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ 
should be honoured with a peculiar worship. For in 
honouring It, we honour His Divine Person. 

The veneration we bear the Saints renders their 
hearts so precious to us, that we look upon them as the 



Digitized by Google 



12 



FIRST PART. 



most precious of their relics. What, then, must we 
think of the adorable Heart of Jesus Christ? Its 
claims to our love are not only higher in degree but 
different in kind. Where is the heart that was ever 
animated with dispositions so admirable, and so con- 
formable to our true interests ? Where shall we find 
one whose movements could be a source of so much 
good to us? It is in this divine Heart that all the 
designs of our salvation have been formed. It is 
through the love with which this Heart burns for us, 
that these same designs have been executed. 

This sacred Heart, says a great servant of God, is 
the seat of all virtues, the source of all benedictions, 
the refuge of all holy souls. The virtues which may 
principally he honoured in It, are — first, a most ardent 
love for God His Father, joined to a most profound 
respect, and the greatest humility that has ever existed ; 
in the second place, an infinite patience in sufferings, 
an excessive grief for the sins which He had taken 
upon Himself, the confidence of a most tender Son 
joined to the confusion of the greatest sinner ; in the 
third place, a most lively compassion for our miseries, 
an immense love for us, notwithstanding these miseries, 
and with all these emotions, each of which was exer- 
cised in the highest degree possible, an unalterable 
equanimity, proceeding from so perfect a conformity to 
the will of God, that it could not be disturbed by any 
event, however contrary it might appear to His zeal, 
His humility, His love itself, and all the other disposi- 
tions He possessed. 

This adorable Heart is still, as far as It can be, in 
the same sentiments. It is, above all, burning with 
love for man ; always open to pour out on them every 
sort of grace and blessing ; always full of compassion 
for our evils ; always urged by the desire to makQ us 
partakers of Its treasures, and to give Itself to us ; 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER HI. 



13 



always ready to receive us, and to be to us a refuge, an 
habitation, a Paradise even in this life. 

For all this, He finds nothing in the heart of man 
but hardness, forgetfulness, contempt, ingratitude. Are 
not these motives to induce Christians to honour this 
Sacred Heart, and to repair so many insults and out- 
rages, by manifest proofs of their love ? 

II. The amiable qualities which are found in (he Person of 
Jesus Christ. 

No one can apply himself to the knowledge of Jesus 
Christ, without finding in Him everything that is 
amiable in creatures, whether reasonable or devoid of 
reason. Every one has his own attraction to love. 
Some are drawn by great beauty, others by meekness. 
We see some who are drawn by the virtues in which 
they are themselves wanting, because they seem to 
them more admirable than those they possess. Others, 
again, have a greater liking for the qualities which 
agree with their own inclinations. Good qualities and 
true virtues command the love of all. But if there 
were on earth a person, says a great servant of God, 
in whom were united all motives for love, who could 
refuse to love him ? Now, all agree that all these are 
to be found united, in a most excellent degree, in the 
adorable Person of Jesus Christ ; and yet Jesus Christ 
is only loved by a very few. 

The most celebrated beauty, says the Prophet, is 
nothing but a withered flower in comparison with that 
of our divine Saviour. It appeared to me, says St. 
Teresa, that the sun cast upon the earth but a pale 
light, after I had seen in an ecstasy, some rays of the 
beauty of Jesus Christ. The most perfect creatures in 
this world are those which have the fewest defects. 
The most splendid qualities in men are accompanied 
by so many imperfections, that whilst we are attracted 



Digitized by Google 



14 



FIRST PART. 



on one side, we are repelled on the other. Jesus Christ 
alone is sovereignly perfect. Everything in Him is 
equally amiable. 

There is nothing in Him, but what ought to win all 
hearts to Him. In Him, we find united all the advan- 
tages of nature, all the riches of grace and of glory, all 
the perfections of the Divinity. We discover abysses, 
a boundless space as it were, and an infinite extent of 
greatness. In a word, this God Incarnate who loves us 
so tenderly, and whom men love so little, is the object of 
the love, the homage, the adorations and the praises of 
the whole Court of heaven. It is He who has supreme 
authority to judge men and angels. The destiny and 
the eternal happiness of all creatures is in His hands ; 
His dominion extends over all nature. All spirits 
tremble in His presence. They are obliged to adore 
Him, either by a voluntary submission of love, or by 
the forced endurance of the effects of His justice. He 
reigns absolutely in the order of grace and in glory. 
The whole world, visible and invisible, is under His 
feet. Is He not, then, an object worthy of the homage 
of mankind ? Does not this Man-God, with all His 
titles and all the glory He possesses, and loving us as 
He does, deserve that we should love Him ? 

But what still more powerfully attracts our love in 
our Divine Saviour, is, that He unites all these rare 
qualities, these magnificent titles, this eminent sove- 
reignty, with so great a meekness, and tenderness for 
us, that it is carried even to excess. His meekness is 
so amiable, that He charmed even His mortal enemies. 
He was led, says the Prophet (Isaiah liii. 9), as a sheep 
to the slaughter: and He was dumb as a lamb before his 
shearer, and he did not open His mouth. He compares 
Himself sometimes to a father, who cannot contain his 
joy at the return of a prodigal son (St Luke xv. 11) ; 
sometimes to a shepherd, who, having found his sheep 
that was lost, puts it upon his shoulders, and calls 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTEB III. 



15 



together his friends and neighbours, that they may 
rejoice because he has found it (St. Luke xv. 5). Hath 
no man condemned thee? He says to the adulterous 
woman ; Neither will I condemn thee: go and now sin 
no more (St. John viii. 10). He exercises no less 
meekness towards us every day. It is extraordinary 
what precautions it is necessary to take in the world, 
to avoid offending a friend. Men are so sensitive, that 
often a single expression of ill-humour is enough to 
make them forget twenty, thirty, forty years of service. 
A single word, spoken unseasonably, sometimes breaks 
the strongest friendship. 

It is not so with Jesus Christ. It seems incredible, 
but nevertheless it is beyond dispute, that we cannot 
possibly have a friend more grateful than He is. We 
must not imagine that He is capable of breaking 
friendship with us for a slight ingratitude. He sees 
all our weaknesses, and bears with incredible goodness 
all the miseries of those He loves. He forgets them, 
and appears not to perceive them. His compassion 
goes so far as to give comfort to those souls who are 
too much afflicted at them. He does not desire that 
our fear of displeasing Him should go so far as to 
disturb us and torment our minds. He would have us 
avoid the smallest faults ; but He does not even wish 
that we should be disquieted at great ones : He desires 
that joy, liberty and peace of heart should be the 
eternal portion of those that truly love Him. 

The least of these qualities, in one of the great ones 
of the world, would be enough to win the hearts of all 
those under him. The mere account of any of these 
virtues in a prince whom we have never seen, and are 
never likely to see, makes an impression on our hearts, 
and makes him beloved, even by strangers. Jesus 
Christ is the only one in whom all these splendid 
qualities, all these virtues, and whatever we can picture 
to ourselves as great, excellent and amiable, are to be 



Digitized by Google 



16 



FIRST PART. 



found united. How is it, then, that so many motives 
for inspiring love do not succeed in making us truly 
love Jesus Christ? It often requires so little in the 
world to gain our hearts. We give away our heart, and 
are prodigal of it for ever so little. Shalt Thou alone, 
oh my God, have no part in it? 

Can we reflect a little on these things, and not feel 
an ardent love of Jesus Christ ? Can we fail to have 
at least a lively grief at loving Him so little ? We owe 
Him our hearts, by so many titles. Can we refuse 
Him, then, this heart, if we add to all these titles the 
immense benefits with which He has presented us, and 
the ardour and excessive tenderness with which He 
has loved and does love us still, never ceasing to give 
us daily manifest proofs of the immense love He has 
for us ? 

III. The sensible proofs of the immense love (hat Jesus Christ 
has for us. 

Of all marks of love, there is none that moves the 
heart of men so deeply as benefits. Either because 
there is nothing that marks more strongly the affection 
of the person who loves; or because nothing is so 
gratifying to our nature, ever inclined, as it is, to seek 
its own interest, as a love which is of service to us. 
Jesus Christ has used this means also, in order to 
oblige us to love Him. He has presented us, He has 
loaded us with a thousand blessings, the least consi- 
deration of which far exceeds all that we can merit, hope 
for, or desire. All are continually receiving His bene- 
fits. All agree in acknowledging the excess of His love, 
of which these benefits are themselves such striking 
proofs. And yet, how few are there who are gained 
by His benefits, or feel themselves touched by His love ! 

By dint of hearing the Creation, the Incarnation, 
and Redemption constantly spoken of, we become ac- 
customed to these words, and to the things they 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTEB III. 



17 



signify : and yet, there is no one so unreasonable as 
not to be at once transported with love, for any one from 
whom he knew he had received the hundredth part of 
the least of these favours. As our soul depends much 
on the senses in its operations, we were naturally little 
moved by the thought of a purely spiritual being. 
Hence it is, that, before the Incarnation of the Word, 
notwithstanding the prodigies wrought by Almighty 
God in favour of His people, there was always a greater 
admixture of fear in their love. But now, this God has 
rendered Himself, so to speak, more sensible to us, by 
becoming man. This Man-God has done more than all 
that we could possibly have conceived, to oblige all men 
to love Him. Had He never formed the design to redeem 
us, He would have been no less holy, powerful, or happy. 
He has, however, had our salvation so much at heart, 
that it might have been supposed, seeing all that He 
has done, and the manner in which He has done it, 
that all His happiness depended upon ours. When he 
might have redeemed us at very little cost, He has 
chosen to merit for us the grace of salvation by His 
death, and by the most disgraceful and cruel death, 
the death of the Cross. When He might have applied 
His merits to us in a thousand ways, He has chosen 
the most wonderful abasement, which has astonished 
heaven and all nations, as the means of doing so. 
All this has been done in order to move our hearts, 
which are naturally grateful for the least benefit, and 
the smallest mark of friendship. Birth under circum- 
stances of the greatest poverty, a laborious and obscure 
life, a Passion loaded with insults, an infamous and 
painful death, are wonders that overpower us : and 
they are all the effects of the love which Jesus has for us. 

Have we ever well conceived the greatness of the 
benefit of our Redemption? and if so, is it possible 
that we should be only ordinarily grateful for such a 
benefit? The sin of our first Parent has, indeed, 

o 



Digitized by Google 



18 



PIR8T PART. 



drawn down upon us great evils, and has deprived us 
of great benefits. But can we look upon Jesus Christ 
in the manger, upon the Cross, or in the Blessed 
Eucharist, without acknowledging that our losses have 
been repaired with advantage? That the blessings 
which we have gained by our Redemption are at least 
equivalent to the privileges which man enjoyed in his 
state of innocence. 

The character of universal Redeemer is no less 
powerful a motive to oblige us to love Him. All were 
dead, says the Apostle, by the sin of Adam, and Jesus 
Christ has died for all. No one has been able to pre- 
serve himself from the contagion of so great an evil. 
The whole world has felt the effect of so powerful a 
remedy. Our loving Saviour has given all His blood, 
for the infidel who knows him not, and for the heretic 
who will not believe in Him, as well as for those who, 
whilst they believe in Him, yet refuse to love Him. 
How infinite is the value of His Blood ! How great a 
Saviour; and how abundant a Redemption! Jesus 
Christ has not been satisfied with paying the debts we 
had contracted. He has prevented all those which we 
might have contracted in future. He has paid, so to 
speak, in advance, before they have been incurred. 
To this we must add those powerful helps, those great 
graces, those signal favours which He heaps on faithful 
souls, and by which He sweetens and renders palat- 
able every thing that is bitter and painful in our 
existence. 

My God ! Didst Thou but grant us the grace to 
understand this excess of mercy, could it be possible 
that we should not be moved, and love Jesus Christ 
with our whole hearts ? Our Blessed Saviour is, in- 
deed, most worthy of our love, for having redeemed us 
by so difficult a means. But is He not still more 
amiable, for having done so, though compelled to it 
only by His immense charity, and by the desire He 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER III. 



19 



had to oblige us to love Him, by such striking proofs 
of His most ardent love ? 

We are utterly unworthy of being redeemed at so 
high a price. Nevertheless, Jesus Christ Himself has 
so valued us, that He has spontaneously offered this 
excessive Redemption for us. And after all this, shall 
we not love Him ? 

But we must remember that, however great and 
ineffable is all that our Lord has done for our salvation, 
the love which has led Him to do it is still greater 
than all, because it is infinite — and as if this love could 
not be satisfied, so long as there remained a miracle it 
had not wrought, He institutes the adorable Sacra- 
ment of the Altar, the sum of all His wonders. He 
truly lives with us until the end of the world. He 
gives Himself to us, under the appearances of bread 
and wine. He makes His flesh and blood the nourish- 
ment of our souls, in order to unite Himself more 
closely to us, or rather to unite us more closely to 
Him. Can we then be possessed of reason, and not 
be deeply moved at the mere recital of this marvel ? 
Can we still retain any feeling of humanity, and not 
be all inflamed with love for Jesus Christ, at the sight 
of such a benefit ? A God feels tenderness for man, 
takes delight in him, and is solicitous about him ! A 
God desires to unite Himself to us, and desires it to 
such an extent as to annihilate and immolate Himself 
daily, and to wish that we should feed upon Him every 
day, without being in the least changed, either by the 
indifference, the disgust, or the contempt of those who 
never receive Him, or by the coldness and the faults 
of those who receive Him often ! Finally, He remains 
upon our Altars, shut up within the Tabernacle, and 
this every day, and at all hours of the day. Are not 
these manifest proofs of the love which Jesus Christ 
has for us ? Are they not motives powerful enough to 
oblige us to love Him ? Ungrateful as we are, since 

c 2 

Digitized by Google 



20 



FIBST PART. 



it is for us alone that all these wonders have heen 
wrought, what are we to think? Does not Jesus 
Christ, dwelling on our Altars, deserve to he honoured 
hy us ? Does He not shew us love sufficient to merit 
a return of love? Woe and anathema to him, who, 
after all this, does not love Jesus Christ. 

To say the truth, said a great servant of God, could 
any thing shake my faith in the Blessed Eucharist, I 
should not doubt of the infinite power which Almighty 
God displays therein, but rather of the excessive love 
which God shows towards us. How what was bread, 
becomes flesh, without ceasing to appear bread : how 
the Body of Jesus Christ is at the same time in several 
places : how He can be contained in an almost indi- 
visible space : to all these wonders I have nothing to 
answer, but that God can do all things. But if I am 
asked, how can it be, that God can love a creature so 
weak and miserable as man ; and that He can love him 
ardently and to such an excess : that He can love him 
as He has loved him : I confess that I have no other 
answer to give, but that this is a truth which is above 
my comprehension : that the love which Jesus Christ 
bears us, is an excessive love, an ineffable love, an 
incomprehensible love, a love which ought to cause 
admiration and surprise in every reasonable man. 

I do not know what power these reflections may have 
in moving the faithful at the present day. But they 
have so deeply moved even the most savage and bar- 
barous nations, that they have been heard to cry out, 
at the mere recital of some of these wonders : What a 
good God is the God of the Christians ! He is a great 
benefactor, and He is worthy of love ! Who can help 
loving a God, who loves us so passionately ? These 
reflections, and the desire of making some return to a 
Saviour, who loves us with so much tenderness, and of 
shewing Him some gratitude, have filled cloisters with 
religious, and deserts with vast numbers of holy soli- 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER HI. 



21 



taries who dedicated and consecrated themselves to the 
praise and love of Jesus Christ. 

However reasonable such a mark of gratitude may 
be, it is not required of all. They are exhorted, not 
entirely to forget Jesus Christ, who has wrought the 
greatest of miracles, only to satisfy His excessive desire 
of remaining with them ; to have a little more feeling 
for the outrages which the excessive love of Jesus 
Christ, for them, causes Him to endure ; in fine, to be 
at least as grateful to Jesus Christ, who loves them so 
constantly, and who has done for them more wonders 
than they can comprehend ; to be as grateful to Him 
as they are towards men, who are ready to sacrifice 
their best friends to the least of their own interests. 

Now a devotion which tends only to inspire this 
gratitude to Jesus Christ, and is in itself, properly 
speaking, only a continual exercise of a perfectly grateful 
love, is it not a reasonable devotion ? Is it not just to 
seek to gain some love for Jesus Christ, especially at 
a time when IJe is so little loved ? There is little love 
for Him in the world, which has little sense of His 
benefits, in which His counsels are so little followed, 
and His maxims so greatly disparaged. There is little 
love for Him at a time, in which there is nothing but 
indifference for His Person, and all the gratitude and 
respect which are shown Him, may be generally re- 
duced to a few prayers and ceremonies, which dege- 
nerate through custom into mere affectation, at a time 
when His Divine presence causes weariness, and His 
precious Body, disgust 

IV. The extreme ingratitude of men towards Jesus Christ. 
However incredible may appear the love which the 
Son of God shows us in the Adorable Eucharist, there 
is something else yet more surprising. It is the ingra- 
titude with which we repay so great a love. It is 
marvellous, indeed, that Jesus Christ should take 



Digitized by Google 



FIE ST PART. 



delight in loving man. But it is most unaccount- 
able that man should not love Jesus Christ, and that 
no motive, no benefit, no excess of love can inspire him 
with the least feeling of gratitude. Jesus Christ may 
perhaps have some reason for loving men. They are 
His work. In them He loves His own gifts. In 
loving them He loves Himself. But can we have any 
reason for not loving Jesus Christ, for loving Him only 
in a small degree, for loving anything together with 
Him? Is there anything, then, in Him, that keeps 
you from Him ? Has He not yet done sufficient to 
merit our love ? Should we ever have dared to desire, 
or ever have been able to imagine, all that He has 
deigned to do, in this adorable mystery, in order to gain 
our hearts ? And yet all this has not been enough to 
oblige men to have an ardent love for Jesus Christ. 

What advantage has Jesus Christ derived from so 
wonderful an abasement ? It might in some sense be 
said that all the other mysteries, the effects of His 
love, have been accompanied by circumstances so glori- 
ous, and prodigies so striking, as to show clearly, that 
in taking care of our interests, He did not entirely 
overlook His own glory. But in this most amiable 
Sacrament, it seems as if Jesus Christ had altogether 
forgotten all these advantages, and that it was His love 
alone that engaged Him therein. Ought not, then, so 
wonderful an excess of love to excite an excessive love 
in the hearts of all men. Alas ! it is quite the contrary. 
It seems as though Jesus Christ would have been more 
loved had He loved us less. I shudder with horror, 
oh my God ! at the mere thought of the indignities 
and outrages which the impiety of wicked Christians, 
and the fury of heretics, have committed against this 
august Sacrament. With what horrible sacrileges have 
not our Altars and our Churches been profaned? 
With what repeated insults, impiety and infamy, has 
not the Body of Jesus Christ been treated ? Can any 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER in. 



28 



Christian reflect on such impiety, without conceiving 
an ardent desire to repair by every possible means 
these cruel outrages? Is it possible, then, that he 
should live without giving it a thought ? 

If, amidst the impiety which Jesus Christ meets 
with at the hands of heretics, He at least were honoured 
and ardently loved by the faithful, we might in some 
degree console ourselves for the outrages of the one, by 
the love and sincere homage of the other. But alas ! 
where are we to look for that crowd of adorers, earnestly 
bent on honouring Jesus Christ in our Churches ? Are 
not our Churches deserted? Can there be greater 
coldness and indifference than what is shown towards 
Jesus Christ in the Blessed Sacrament ? The scanty 
number that are to be seen in our Churches during the 
greater part of the day, are they not a visible proof of 
the forgetfulness and want of love of almost all Chris- 
tians? Those who approach our Altars most frequently, 
familiarise themselves with these most august mys- 
teries. It may be said, that there are Priests, whose 
familiarity with Jesus Christ goes so far as to grow 
into indifference and contempt. How many amongst 
them are there, who, by offering Him daily, increase 
in love for Him? How many who celebrate these 
divine mysteries, like persons who truly believe in 
them ? 

We perhaps think that Jesus Christ is insensible to 
such bad treatment. But can we ourselves think on 
the treatment which He receives, and be insensible, 
and not seek to make reparation by every means in 
our power ? How can anyone reflect a lit&e on these 
truths, and not dedicate himself wholly to the love of 
this Man-God, who alone has a right to the hearts of 
all. If we do not love Him, it must either be that we 
do not know Him, or that we are worse than that 
wicked demon spoken of in the life of St. Catherine of 
Genoa, who did not complain of the flames that con* 



Digitized by Google 



FIRST PART. 



sumed him, nor of the other pains which he endured, 
but only of being devoid of love, — of that love which so 
many souls know nothing of, or refuse to exercise, to 
their eternal loss. 

Let us remember, that the Sacred Heart of Jesus in 
the Blessed Sacrament has still, as far as can be, the 
same sentiments It always had. It is always inflamed 
with love for man, always sensibly touched by our 
misfortunes, always urged by the desire to make us 
partakers of Its treasures and to give Itself to us, 
always disposed to receive us, and to serve as a dwelling 
and a paradise for us, even in this life, and above all, 
as a refuge at the hour of death. And, for all this, 
what sentiments of gratitude does He find in the hearts 
of men ? what solicitude ? what love ? He loves, and 
He is not loved. We do not even know His love, 
because we do not condescend to receive the gifts by 
which He would show it to us, nor listen to the tender 
and secret declarations that He would make of it to our 
hearts. Is not this a motive powerful enough to touch 
the hearts of all who are at all reasonable, and who 
have some little tenderness for Jesus Christ? Our 
loving Saviour, in instituting this Sacrament of love, 
foresaw clearly all the ingratitude of mankind. He felt 
by anticipation in His Sacred Heart, all the grief which 
it was to cause Him. Yet all this could not keep Him 
at a distance, nor prevent Him from showing us the 
excess of His love, in the institution of this adorable 
mystery. 

Is it not just, amidst so much incredulity and cold- 
ness, so many profanations and outrages, that this God 
of love should find at least some friends of His Sacred 
Heart, who should be pained by the little love felt for 
Him, feel the injuries offered Him, be faithful and 
assiduous in adoring Him in the holy Eucharist, and 
neglect nothing in order to repair, by their love, by 
their adorations, and by every kind of homage, all the 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



25 



outrages to which the excess of His love daily exposes 
Him, in this august Sacrament ? 

This is the end which we aim at in this devotion, in 
honouring this Sacred Heart, which ought to he infi- 
nitely dearer to us than our own. The act of atone- 
ment and of oblation, the visits to the Blessed Sacra- 
ment, the prayers, the Communions, and all the other 
practices, tend only to render us more grateful and 
more faithful, by giving us an ardent love for Jesus 
Christ. There is no devotion, then, more just or 
reasonable. We shall see, in like manner, that there 
is no devotion more useful for our salvation and per- 
fection. 



Chapteb IV. 

How useful this devotion is for our salvation and our 
perfection. 

If Jesus Christ has wrought so many miracles to 
oblige us to love Him, what favours will He not do to 
those whom He sees anxious to show Him their grati- 
tude and ardent love ? He has loved us with tender- 
ness, says St. Bernard, and has loaded us with gifts, 
when we did not love Him, when even we did not wish 
that He should love us. " Dilexit non existentes, sed 
et resistentes." (St. Bern.) What gifts and graces will 
He not heap upon those who love Him, and who are so 
touched by seeing Him so little loved ? 

It has been shown clearly enough, that the devotion 
to the Sacred Heart of Jesus is a proof, or rather, a 
continual exercise of an ardent love for Jesus Christ. 
It consists, moreover, in the practice of the holiest 
exercises of our religidn. It unites in itself such power 
and tenderness, that it obtains all things from God. 
Indeed, if Jesus Christ grants such great graces to 
those who have a devotion to the instruments of His 



Digitized by Google 



FIRST PART* 



Passion, and to His Sacred Wounds, what favours will 
He not bestow on those who have a tender devotion 
towards His Sacred Heart? Reasons have been ad- 
duced in the Preface of this book, to lead any prudent 
man not to refuse his belief to the revelations of St. 
Mechtildis. Hear what this Saint says on the subject 
which we are speaking of, (Sp. Works of St. Mech- 
tildis, book ii. ch. 18.) " I saw one day," she says, 
" the Son of God. He held in His hands His own 
Heart, which was brighter than the sun, and shed rays 
of light from every part. It was then that our loving 
Saviour made known to me, that, from the plenitude of 
that Divine Heart issue all the graces which God pours 
continually upon men, according to the capacity of 
each." The same Saint testified, shortly before her 
death, that having one day earnestly begged of our 
Lord a great grace, for a person who had asked her to 
do so (book iv. chap. 14), Jesus Christ said to her: 
" My child, tell the person for whom you pray, that 
whatever she wishes for, she must seek in my Heart. 
Let her ask Me for all things in this Heart, like a son 
who knows no other artifice but what love suggests, 
and who asks of his father whatever he wants." 
, Almighty God having made known to that person 
of whom we spoke in the second chapter, and for whom 
Fr. la Colombiere had so much veneration, the great 
graces that He had annexed to the practice of this de- 
votion gave her to understand that it was by a last 
effort, so to speak, of His love for men, that He had 
resolved to discover to them the treasures of His 
Sacred Heart, and inspire them with this devotion, 
which is calculated to make the love of Jesus Christ 
spring up in the hearts of the most insensible, and to 
inflame those of the least fervent. "Publish every- 
where," said our loving Saviour, "insinuate, recom- 
mend this devotion to persons in the world, as a sure 
and easy means to obtain from Me a true love of God ; 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



to ecclesiastics and religious persons, as an effectual 
means of attaining to the perfection of their state ; to 
those who labour for the salvation of their neighbours, 
as a means of touching the most obdurate souls ; and 
finally to all the faithful, as one of the most solid and 
suitable devotions by which to gain the victory over the 
strongest passions, to restore peace and union in the 
most disunited families, to rid themselves of the most 
inveterate imperfections, to obtain a most tender and 
ardent love of Me, and finally to arrive in a short 
time, and by an easy method, at the most sublime 
perfection." 

St. Bernard, full of these sentiments, always speaks 
of the Sacred Heart of Jesus as the treasury of all 
graces, and the inexhaustible fountain of all blessings 
(St. Bern. Pass., tract i. ch. 3). "Oh most sweet 
Jesus," he cries, " what riches dost Thou enclose in 
Thy Heart, and how easy is it for us to enrich our- 
selves, possessing as we do, in the adorable Eucharist, 
tnis infinite treasure." " In this adorable Heart," says 
St. Peter Damian, " we find all the weapons necessary 
for our defence, all the remedies suited to the cure of 
our diseases, all the most powerful aids against the 
assaults of our enemies, all the sweetest consolations 
to alleviate our sufferings, all the purest delights to fill 
our souls with joy. Cor Christi cceleste gazophilacium 
et erarium est" (St. Peter Damian, Excell. of St. John 
Evang., serm. 1). " Are you afflicted ? do your enemies 
persecute you ? does the remembrance of your past sins 
trouble you ? do you feel your heart agitated by disquiet, 
by fear, or by passions ? Come and prostrate yourself 
at the foot of the Altar. Throw yourself, as it were, 
into the arms of Jesus Christ. Enter even into His 
Heart. He is the asylum and refuge of holy souls, and 
a place of shelter where our soul is in perfect security. 
Cor Christi asylum perfugii in tentationibus and tribu- 
lationibus" (Blosi Consol. of the faithful soul). " The 



Digitized by Google 



28 



FIRST PART. 



Sacred Heart of Jesus," says the devout Lanspergius^ 
" is not only the seat of all the virtues, but it is also 
the fountain of graces by which these virtues are ac- 
quired and preserved. Have a tender devotion to this 
loving Heart, which is so full of love and mercy. 
Through It ask for all that you wish to obtain and 
offer of all your actions. For this Sacred Heart is the 
treasury of all supernatural gifts. It is, so to speak, 
the way by which we unite ourselves more closely with 
God, and by which God communicates Himself more 
lovingly to us. You have in this Sacred Heart all the 
graces, all the virtues of which you stand in need, and 
you need not fear to exhaust this infinite treasure. 
Have recourse to It in all your necessities. Be faithful 
in the holy practices of a devotion so reasonable and so 
useful, and you will soon perceive its effects. Ad 
venerationem cordis piissimi Jesu, amore ac miseri- 
cordia exuberantissimi studeas te ipsum excitare, ac 
sedula devotione ipsum frequentare. Per ipsum pe- 
tenda petas, et exercitia tua offeras quia charismatum 
omnium est apotheca et ostium, per quod nos ad Deum, 
et ipse ad nos accedit .... Gratiam quoque ejus, et 
virtutes, ac prorsus quid-quid fuerit tibi (quod men- 
suram excedit) salutare, videaris tibi ex gratioso Corde 
attrahere .... Ad quod in necessitate confugias, unde 
consolationem quoque et omne auxilium haurias" (Lans- 
pergius, Shafts of Divine Love to the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus). We find also an illustrious example of this in 
the life of St. Mechtildis. The Son of God, in an ap- 
parition to her, commanded her ardently to love and to 
honour as much as possible His Sacred Heart in the 
Blessed Sacrament. He gave her His Heart as a 
pledge of His love, and as her place of refuge in life, 
and all her consolation in death. From that time the 
Saint felt within herself an extraordinary devotion 
towards the Sacred Heart, and received from It so 
many graces, that she used to say, that were she to 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



29 



write down all the gifts and favours she had received 
by means of this devotion, there would be no book, 
however large, that would suffice to contain them. The 
happy results which have been already experienced, 
and are still daily experienced, by those who have this 
devotion at heart, sufficiently confirms the sentiments 
of these beloved friends of God. 

"I am resolved,*' says the author of the Interior 
Christian (book v. ch. 23), " to depend in future only 
on Divine Providence, without seeking either consola- 
tion or support in creatures. I should be like an 
infant, which, without disquiet or fear, reposes sweetly 
in the arms of its mother, whilst it receives from her a 
thousand caresses and endearments. I confess that it 
is thus our Lord treats me. For, without seeking else- 
where wherewith to nourish and enrich my soul, I find 
in His Sacred Heart all the helps and graces of which 
I stand in need, and I find them in so great abundance, 
and I am so liberally enriched with them, that