 be to me in future my shelter, and the place of 
my rest. Hoc requies mea, hie habitabo. (Ps. xiii. v. 14.) 

Full of these sentiments of love and confidence, we 
may sometimes say to Him with great simplicity, and 
in a respectful, yet familiar manner, " Thou art in this 
place, oh Lord, only to do me good. Who is there 
then, that shall hinder it.? If my imperfections are an 
obstacle, begin, if it please Thee, by freeing me fr&m 

K 



Digitized by Google 



130 



THIRD PART; 



these imperfections. Cure these wounds, which make 
me displeasing in Thy sight. I have not loved Thee, it 
is true. I am deeply grieved that it has been so. But 
at least, it seems to me that I have a true desire of 
loving Thee, and if this desire were not sincere, I should 
not so often come before Thee, who seest to the bottom 
of the heart, to ask for Thy love. Until I am wholly in- 
flamed with this love, I shall never cease asking for it 
with earnestness, and even with importunity. DUigam te 9 
Domine, fortitudo mea et refugium meum" (Ps. xvii. v. 1.) 

We may also occupy ourselves usefully at this time, 
in making acts of faith, adoration, thanksgiving, hope, 
and love, each one according to his devotion. For 
example: " I believe, 0 Lord, that Thou art really pre- 
sent on this Altar, and it is my wish that the modesty 
and respect which I desire to show in Thy presence, 
should be a proof of the sincerity of my faith. I render 
Thee thanks for having loved me to such an excess. 
Humbly prostrate at Thy feet, I make Thee a repara- 
tion of honour, in atonement for all the insults and 
outrages Thou hast endured since the institution of this 
august Sacrament. I hope, oh Lord, and I am certain 
that Thy Providence will never fail me in my neces- 
sities, and will happily lead me to the accomplishment 
of thy designs, by the path which Thou wilt deign to 
show me. Open to me, oh Lord, Thy sacred Heart ; 
for this is the place of my repose. I wish to dwell 
therein all the days of my life, and there, at the hour of 
my death, to breathe out my last sigh." This is but an 
example of such acts as we may make. We can extend 
them as much aa we please. 

It is well, however, to remember the advice given by 
St. Francis, of Sales, on this subject, (Introd. to a Dev. 
Life. p. iiL, ch. 13.) "Prayers of this sort, which are 
indeed, properly speaking, only aspirations, are most 
useful. But it is my opinion." says this great Saint, 
" that we should not force ourselvea to repeat always 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



131 



the same words." Pronounce often, either with the 
heart or lips, those which love suggests to you at the 
time. It will always furnish you with what you want. 
There are, it is true, certain verses of the Psalms, and 
some passages of holy Scripture, which are most 
powerful in moving the heart. We must make use of 
those in which we find most devotion, and spend most 
time in them. 

HI. Practice for spending every day, a quarter, or half an 
hour in prayer, before the Blessed Sacrament, suited to all 
sorts of persons. 

This practice of devotion is easy. For, properly 
speaking, it consists only in loving Jesus Christ, and in 
making use of Jesus Christ Himself, in order to love 
Him. The method is as follows: — 

1. After having adored our Lord in this mystery, 
with all the respect that His real Presence requires, 
unite yourself to Him, and to all His Divine operations 
in the holy Eucharist, where He ceases not to love and 
adore God His Father in the name of all men, and in 
the most perfect manner which we can imagine, in the 
condition of a victim. Meditate and endeavour to un- 
derstand His recollection, His 3olitude, His hidden life, 
that wonderful deprivation of all things to which He is 
reduced, His obedience to the word of the Priest, 
whoever he be, His humility, and His other virtues, 
according to the example He gives us of them, in the 
Eucharistic state. Excite yourself to imitate them, and 
resolve to do it on such occasions as shall present 
themselves. But especially take time to consider the 
admirable dispositions of His Sacred Heart towards us, 
and all the sublime virtues of which He is the source, 
the immense love He has for his Father, His ardent 
charity for all men, and His eagerness for their salva- 
tion. Try to discover in that Divine Heart all the 
abysses it contains, of humiliation, abjection, poverty, 



Digitized by Google 



132 



THIRD PABT. 



suffering. Consider what axe the sentiments of His 
holy soul, at the sight of the ingratitude of men who 
have nothing but indifference for Him. Excite yourself 
to produce suitable acts, to make reparation as far as 
possible, for all these insults, by sentiments of gratitude, 
and chiefly by an ardent love of Jesus Christ. 

2. Offer to the Eternal Father, Jesus Christ, His Son, 
as the only Victim worthy of Him, and by Whom alone 
we can render homage to His supreme dominion, thank 
Him for His benefits, satisfy His justice, and oblige His 
mercy to come to our assistance : Say to Him with the 
Prophet: Respice in faciem Christi tui. Look on the face 
of Thy Christ, (Ps. lxxxiii. v. 10.) It is true my God, 
that I deserve to be treated as a rebellious servant. 
But, behold, oh Eternal Father, Thy dear Son, Who is 
perfectly obedient, and Who offers Himself to Thee at 
this moment upon this Altar. Look upon the profound 
abasement to which He is reduced, for the pardon of my 
infidelities and disobedience. Respite in faciem Christi 
tui. On whatever side Thy justice may accuse me, I 
will immediately offer Thy beloved Son to disarm it. 
Did I see Thy anger, a hundred times on the point of 
bursting over me, a hundred times I would say the 
same words : Respice in faciem Christi tui. I deserve 
nothing, but I offer Thee a victim that merits all. I 
consent that Thou shouldst refuse me both the pardon 
of my sins and all other graces, if He Whom I offer 
Thee, has not fully satisfied Thee. But thou canst not 
refuse me anything that I ask in virtue of the merits of 
Jesus Christ, of His sufferings and death. The re- 
ward of these belongs to us; for He hast ransferred 
them to us. I ask Thee much oh Eternal Father, but 
I offer Thee the Body, the Blood, and the life of Thy 
Son immolated on this Altar, in payment of what I ask. 
What can I desire, that will not fall short of the value 
of what I offer to obtain it? 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



133 



3. Offer yourself to God, by the hands of Jesus 
Christ; and offer to Him, your life, your employments, 
your inclinations, your passions, and in particular, 
some virtuous action, which you resolve to perform, or 
some mortification which you resolve to practise, in 
order to overcome yourself. And all this, for the same 
ends, for which our Lord immolates Himself in the 
blessed Sacrament. 

4. Offer yourself to Jesus Christ, in order to unite 
yourself more closely to Him. Entreat Him to make 
you enter into His spirit and into His sentiments, 
and especially into His Sacred Heart, so as never to 
depart from It. Look upon Jesus Christ as your 
head, and consider yourself as one of His members, 
His associates, and His brethren, to whom He has 
surrendered all His merits, and to whom He has left as 
a legacy, the reward due to Him from His Father, for 
His labours, and His death. In this character you 
may dare to present yourself before God with confidence, 
to converse familiarly with Him, and to oblige Him in 
some sort to hear you favourably, to grant your 
petitions, and to bestow upon you His graces, on 
account of the alliance and union existing between you 
and His Eternal Son, and through the infinite Value 
and dignity of the Victim, Whom we offer to Him in the 
Blessed Sacrament You may conclude by making a 
spiritual Communion, accompanied by a perfect conse- 
cration of all your affections and desires to His Sacred 
Heart. 

This method of prayer is excellent, and there is 
more reason for making it familiar to us, in as much, as 
our happiness in this life, depends on our union with 
Jesus Christ in the Blessed Sacrament It might be 
well to practise it once a day. Any time is suited to 
it, especially certain hours of the day, at which Jesus 
Christ is seldom visited. 



Digitized by Google 



134 



THIRD PABT. 



There is another most useful method of prayer, in 
presence of the Blessed Sacrament. After having 
made an act of faith, and adored Jesus Christ, excite 
yourself to a tender love of Him, and entreat Him to 
inflame you daily, more and more, with His love. 
Then enter into yourself, and examine the state of your 
soul, your defects, your passions, your weakness, your 
infirmities, and the depth of your miseries, and lay them 
open with simplicity hefore Jesus Christ. Submit 
yourself entirely to His holy will, and bless Him 
equally, for the chastisements of His justice, and for 
the favours of His mercy; humble yourself before His 
sovereign majesty ; make a sincere confession to Him 
of your sins and infidelities, ask His pardon for them, 
detest all the evil you have committed, and resolve to 
amend for the future. 

Enter then, as it were, into the adorable Heart of 
Jesus Christ. Consider the contempt He feels, for all 
that this world esteems : what idea He entertains of 
these vain honours, these apparent goods, and these 
insipid pleasures, mixed with so much bitterness. 
Reflect at the same time on the esteem He has for all, 
that the greater number of men lotfk upon with dis- 
gust. How pleasing in His eyes is a poor and obscure 
life, full of humiliations and contempt. Which of the 
two, then, is deceived? Are we, who esteem and love 
so passionately all that Jesus Christ despises, or is 
Jesus Christ Himself, Who wholly despises, and ex- 
pressly condemns, what we so eagerly seek after? 
These reflections, if seriously made, are most useful for 
freeing us from numberless false notions which de- 
ceive us, and for inspiring us with that true wisdom 
which we admire in the Saints. This kind of prayer 
is most useful. It is unconstrained, and gives room 
for the exercise of every affection. We may make it at 
any time, but especially after some unexpected mis- 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



135 



fortune, in order that we may submit ourselves to the 
chastisements of God's justice, or after the hurry and 
embarrassment of business, in order to regain our 
recollection. In fine, we have only to visit Jesus 
Christ often, to learn how to visit Him, and to taste the 
pleasure which is to be found in conversing with our 
Divine Lord. There is no one who is more amiable in 
the world, and no one who loves us more. His con- 
versation has no tediousness. To say, that we know 
not what to do before the Blessed Sacrament, is to say, 
that we do not know how to believe, how to ask for the 
graces which we need, how to love. We are unhappy 
in this world, only because we do not know our hap- 
piness. We do not know Him, who is in the midst of 
us. Is it possible that we should know Him, and yet 
love Him so little. Can we love Him, and yet so 
seldom visit him ? 

IV. A few words of advice on frequent visits to the 
Blessed Sacrament. 

In order to derive all the benefit we can, from 
frequent visits to the Blessed Sacrament, we shall do 
well to observe what follows: — 

1. We should never enter the Church, but with 
great modesty. This should be a visible proof of our 
faith, and of the reverence we feel for the holiness of 
the place. For this, it is enough, to reflect on what 
we are doing. A humble and respectful posture, a 
modest countenance, accompanied by interior recollec- 
tion, are very necessary dispositions for receiving signal 
favours from Jesus Christ. 

2. Our vocal prayers, should be short; but tender 
and affectionate. The simplest and least studied are 
best suited to one who speaks from the heart 

$. Though all times are seasonable for rendering our 



Digitized by Google 



136 



THIRD PART. 



homage to Jesus Christ, there are certain hours of the 
day, and certain days in the year, in which our visits 
are most pleasing to Him. Such are, the morning for 
religious persons and ecclesiastics, who have the Blessed 
Sacrament in their own house, and the afternoon for 
all kinds of persons. It is difficult to express the 
advantages gained by those who are diligent in being 
the first to visit the Blessed Sacrament on rising. 
The eagerness we show in going at once to adore the 
Blessed Sacrament, and in being the first to offer Him 
our homage, pleases Him exceedingly. It is very 
clear, that, were a servant, a friend, or a child, to show 
the same eagerness in our regard, we should be deeply 
touched by it. We may judge then, what must be the 
effect produced in the Heart of our Divine Lord. This 
fervour and exactness oblige Him to grant us during 
the day, the special graces we need, in the exercise of 
our employments and on various occasions. Weak and 
imperfect souls, who have hardly any love for Jesus 
Christ, never manifest this eagerness for any length of 
time, though it is so reasonable and just. For it is as 
much the effect, as the cause, of a most ardent love of 
Jesus Christ. The afternoon is also a very suitable 
time for receiving great benefits from our loving Saviour, 
and for showing Him our love : especially at certain 
hours when He is almost forgotten, and is very rarely 
visited. It is neither the crowd that draws us thither 
at that time, nor custom that impels us. The love of 
Jesus Christ must be our chief motive. It is this that 
obliges Jesus Christ to be so liberal during these visits. 
It is during them that many great Saints have received 
those singular graces, which have conducted them in a 
short time to the highest perfection. Besides Feasts, 
which are especially consecrated to the service of God, 
there are certain days in the year, on which it is most 
useful to visit Jesus Christ, more assiduously than 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



187 



usual. Such are days devoted by the world to 
amusement. The carnival; times of public joy, and 
other similar occasions, with which the greater part of 
the world are wholly taken up, may be turned to great 
account by such as are generous and faithful enough to 
consecrate them particularly to Jesus Christ. One 
single mark, such as this, of love and fidelity, has 
proved the first source of the sublime perfection, 
attained by some of the greatest Saints. 

We must not depart from before the Blessed Sacra- 
ment before saying to Jesus Christ, in the words of 
Jacob : Non dimittam te, nisi benedixeris mihi (Gen. xxxii. 
26) : My Saviour, I will not leave Thee until Thou hast 
given me Thy blessing. 

We should entertain so great a respect for everything 
consecrated to Jesus Christ, especially for the place where 
He dwells, that nothing should ever make us relax on 
this point. We should never, under any pretext, fail 
to maintain that respect and silence which are so care- 
fully observed in the houses of the great. Let us never 
forget, each time we visit Jesus Christ, to honour His 
Sacred Heart by some special act of homage. Let us 
offer Him our hearts, that they may be so completely 
united to His, as of two hearts to form but one. 

Finally, all in general may be told that the great 
means of becoming recollected, spiritual, and solidly 
virtuous, is frequently to visit Jesus Christ in the 
Blessed Sacrament. If we would make these visits 
with profit, we must make them like persons who really 
believe that they are visiting Jesus Christ. We must 
act towards Him with great respect, simplicity, and 
confidence, speak little, listen to Him attentively, and 
love Him much. 



Digitized by Google 



138 



THIRD FART. 



Chapter m. 

Practice for celebrating and hearing Mass. 

I. Reflection on the Sacrifice of the Mass. 

As there is no act of worship on earth that renders 
greater honour to God than the holy sacrifice of the 
Mass, we ought to look upon it as the most important 
action of our lives. Everything is great and wonderful 
in this mystery. The power of God therein is infinite ; 
His love excessive ; His patience extreme. There is 
nothing about it that does not call for our admiration. 
We believe that God can work all these miracles if He 
wills, and there is no reason to doubt that He has 
willed it. But what is more incomprehensible and 
surprising is, to see a Priest at the Altar without 
gravity, devotion, or modesty ; to see Christians assist- 
ing at these tremendous mysteries only to profane them 
by their disrespect, the sinful state of their hearts, the 
dissipation of their minds, and the wandering of their 
senses. 

We can conceive that a man may be ungrateful 
enough to despise the benefits which he receives from 
another man, but it is incomprehensible that a man, 
who has, every day, the happiness of conversing fami- 
liarly with Jesus Christ, of holding Him in his hands, 
of distributing Him to the people, should set hardly 
any value on so sublime a dignity, and feel only cold- 
ness and indifference for Jesus Christ ; that, possessing 
faith, he should go to the Altar burdened with con- 
siderable imperfections ; that he should remain there 
without any sentiment of devotion or love ; and that he 
should depart from the Altar as little touched by the 
excellence and sublime sanctity of this mystery as when 
he went up to it. 

.A Priest at the Altar is the mediator between God 
and men. He treats with Almighty God in the name 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER III. 



189 



of the whole Church. He offers to Him a sacrifice 
proportioned to the benefits which we have received 
from Him, and which we desire to obtain : a sacrifice 
capable of cancelling all the sins of men : a sacrifice, 
in a word, that cannot but be pleasing to God. And 
yet, are there not to be found Priests, who are not at all 
moved by so holy and so sublime a ministry? Are 
there not some who are only known as Priests when 
they are seen at the Altar, and who even, at the Altar, 
dishonour the sanctity of their ministry by their want 
of devotion ? Is not the great haste with which this 
awful sacrifice is offered a visible mark of a want of 
faith ? Whole hours are spent agreeably in conversa- 
tion, but it is hard to spend half an hour with Jesus 
Christ. Is it possible that we feel weariness only when 
we are with Him ? 

If the account we shall have to give will be propor- 
tioned to the dignity of our employments and the 
benefits we have received ; if, to be saved, our virtue 
must correspond with the holiness of our state and of 
our ministry, has not a Priest, who possesses only a low 
degree of virtue, and who, after offering this adorable 
sacrifice several thousand times, is not more devout, 
but is perhaps even more imperfect than before he was 
a Priest, reason to fear the formidable judgments of 
God ? Has he, whom the Body and Blood of Jesus 
Christ could not move, when he held It in his hands, 
any ground for believing that there is anything in the 
world capable of making him less insensible ? 

The Priesthood is, without doubt, one of the highest 
dignities and greatest favours that God has ever granted 
to a mere creature. It is clear, then, that this exalted 
ministry requires perfect men. Though the virtue of 
the solitaries that lived in the time of St. J. Chrysostom 
had attained a great height of perfection, and the greater 
number possessed the gift of working miracles, yet their 



Digitized by Google 



140 



THIRD PART. 



virtue, says the Saint, is as far inferior to that which is 
fitting and necessary for the state of Priests, as the 
rank of a private person is below the majesty of a king : 
Tantum discrimen quantum sit inter privatum et Regem. 
(Chrys. de Sacerd.) 

Great graces, indeed, are required in order to attain 
to this degree of virtue. But has not a Priest the 
means of being all powerful ? Is not the holy sacrifice 
of the Mass an infallible means of obtaining all sorts 
of graces ? " Yes, my God," cries out a great servant 
of God (Fr. la Colombiere, Ret. Chret.j, penetrated 
with these sentiments : " when I pray, when I fast, 
when I give alms, I do it with diffidence. Perhaps, 
I say to myself, I dishonour God more by my bad inten- 
tions, and by the circumstances of my actions, than I 
honour Him by the action itself. This penance, so far 
from blotting out my sins, possibly may itself require 
penance. But when I say Mass or hear it, when I offer 
the adorable Sacrifice in quality of minister or member 
of the Church, then, oh my God, full of confidence and 
courage, I dare to challenge Heaven itself to do anything 
more pleasing to Thee. Then, without being terrified 
either by the number or the enormity of my sins, I dare 
to ask of Thee the pardon of them, not doubting but 
that Thou will grant it me in the most perfect manner 
I can desire. However vast may be my desires, how- 
ever great my hopes, I have no difficulty in asking for 
what is required to accomplish them. I ask of Thee 
graces, and great graces, and all sorts of graces for 
myself, for my friends, and for my bitterest enemies ; 
and so far from being ashamed of my request's, or of 
being diffident of obtaining so many things at the 
same time, I even think that I ask too little in com- 
parison with what I offer. I even feel as if I offered a 
slight to this living Sacrifice by asking infinitely less 
than It is worth. I fear nothing so much as not to 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER HI. 



141 



expect, with a firm and constant hope, not only all I 
have asked for, but even something greater, if possible, 
than all I can ask." 

Would to God that we understood the value of the 
treasure we possess ! Happy, indeed, are Christians, 
did they but know how to profit by its value ! What a 
source of every kind of good should we not find in this 
adorable Sacrifice ! What graces, what favours, what 
temporal and spiritual riches for the body and the soul, 
for time and eternity ! But, we must confess it, we do 
not even think of making use of our treasures. We do 
not condescend to put our hand into the treasury Jesus 
Christ has left us. 

What a remedy have we in our power against all 
sorts of evils ! We have a tree of life that can impart 
to us not only health, but even immortality, and yet 
we are oppressed with infirmities ! Had you been on 
Calvary, what would have been refused you ? When 
you are at Mass, you may receive the same benefits as 
you might have received on Calvary. Jesus Christ, in 
the Mass, places Himself in our hands as a victim of 
infinite value, to obtain from God all that we can 
desire, however precious the gift that we ask for. Jesus 
Christ, in the Sacrifice of the Mass, is not only our in- 
tercessor with His Father, to obtain from Him, through 
His merits, all that is necessary for us, and all that we 
wish for, He offers His Blood and His life as the price 
of what we ask. What can you desire that is not 
below the price you offer ? How comes it then, that 
all complain, some of their temporal miseries, others of 
their imperfections and failings ? How is it that our 
passions tyrannise over us ; that bad habits keep us, as 
it were, in chains ; that one is troubled with so many 
fruitless desires ; that another so frequently yields to 
temptation ; that impatience and anger daily infuriate 
some persons, and grief and melancholy oppress others ? 
How is it that a wife can neither soften her husband, 



Digitized by Google 



143 



THIRD PART. 



nor maintain peace in her family ? that a father sees 
with grief his children following the path of wicked- 
ness? How is it that the greater number, even of 
those who make a profession of piety, pass nearly all 
their lives in gross imperfections, and especially in ex- 
cessive tepidity in God's service ? We desire to correct 
ourselves, and reform others, and yet we do nothing. 
It is as though we saw a miser in want of everything, 
though with gold and silver in abundance. Have you 
asked for this, as you ought, at Mass ? How many 
times have you heard it for this intention ? Will you 
ever persuade me that Almighty God, for so great a 
price, has refused you so trifling a request ? that He 
has esteemed so lightly the Blood and the life of His 
Son, as not to think them equivalent to that grace, that 
virtue, that spiritual or temporal blessing you desire for 
yourself or for another, if it were for your good to grant 
it you ? that you have asked with sincerity for a great 
love of Jesus Christ, and that Jesus Christ has refused 
it to you ? No : I will never believe it, and I am sure 
that you do not yourself believe it. What, then, is the 
reason ? It is that we neglect to assist at Mass, and 
to represent to Almighty God, at that precious and 
acceptable time of salvation, all our miseries, and to 
ask Him the graces which are necessary for us. Lastly, 
it is because we do not offer this adorable Sacrifice like 
persons who believe, and who seriously reflect on what 
they believe. 

H. Practice for the celebration of the Sacrifice of (he Mass. 

If the Priest thoroughly understands the excellence 
of his state, and the sublime sanctity of his ministry, 
he would never approach the Altar but with a holy awe, 
nor depart from it without infinite gratitude. Almighty 
God is more honoured by a single Mass than He can 
be by all the actions of angels and men, however fervent 
and heroic they may be. We ought, therefore, to look 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER in. 



143 



upon this as the greatest and most important action of 
our lives, and to perform it with all possible perfection. 
All the offices with which Almighty God has honoured 
the Angels are inferior in excellence and dignity to this. 
To say Mass is something greater than to govern the 
universe, to raise the dead, and to work the greatest 
miracles. Judge, then, if a preparation or a thanks- 
giving of a quarter of an hour can suffice for so great 
an action. 

Let us prescribe to ourselves whatever rule we please 
in this respect The whole life of a Priest ought to be 
spent in preparation and in thanksgiving. No shorter 
time is sufficient. A Priest ought to do nothing but 
with the thought that he has to say Mass, or that he 
has said it All his words and actions ought to be so 
holy, as to be a preparation for the celebration of the 
divine mysteries, and continual proofs of his gratitude 
and love. There is no one on earth who approaches 
Jesus Christ more closely than the Priest. There is 
no one, therefore, who ought to resemble Him more 
closely in sanctity of life. All other practices are in- 
sufficient Purity and holiness of life must be his 
principal preparation. 

We shall do well, on rising, to recite the prayers 
appointed by the Church, as a preparation for Mass. 
Our thanksgiving should end only with the day. The 
time immediately preceding or following the sacrifice 
should be employed in increasing our recollection, in 
renewing our intentions, in endeavouring to render 
ourselves less unworthy of it ; by deep reflections on 
what we are about to do, or have already done, with 
acts of faith, contrition, humility, thanksgiving, and 
love. 

The Priest, in going to the Altar, iriust no longer 
look upon himself as a man, but as Jesus Christ. It 
is Jesus. Christ who is going to speak by his mouth, 
and immolate Himself by his hands. He should, there- 



Digitized by Google 



144 



THIRD PABT. 



fore, perform no exterior action of which he cannot say, 
€ f this is an action of Jesus Christ." He must observe 
even the smallest ceremonies with the greatest exact- 
ness, if anything can be called small, that is done in 
the celebration of the greatest and most august of all 
sacrifices. He must observe these sacred ceremonies 
with a certain air of grandeur and majesty, and with so 
much modesty that his countenance and his very ap- 
pearance may inspire all with devotion and respect. 
He should offer this adorable Sacrifice in so serious, 
devout, and respectful a manner, that God may be 
honoured, Jesus Christ recognized in the person of His 
minister, and all who are present edified. 

As Jesus Christ immolates and sacrifices Himself by 
the hands of his minister, the minister ought also to 
offer and immolate himself with Jesus Christ. He is 
chosen and, as it were, deputed by the whole Church, 
to offer adoration to God, to thank Him for his benefits, 
to appease His anger, and implore His mercy. He 
ought to discharge his commission with diligence, 
especially after the consecration. Then he ought, like 
Moses, to bind, as it were, the hands of God's justice. 
Then he ought to acknowledge, by means of this precious 
victim, the infinite greatness of the Sovereign Being, 
and annihilate himself above all before Him, as does 
the Son of God on the Altar. Then he ought to repre- 
sent all the wants of his people, convinced that he 
shall obtain all he asks ; since he offers a sacrifice of 
infinite value, which cannot but be pleasing to Almighty 
God. 

. We . need not wonder that the Apostles and Disciples, 
who conversed so familiarly with Jesus Christ, received 
such great graces; we should rather wonder, that a. 
Priest at the Altar is not all powerful, that he loves 
Jesus Christ only imperfectly, that he is wanting in 
devotion, when he offers this adorable Sacrifice. He is 
with Jesus Christ, when he pleases, and as long as lie: 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER III. 



145 



pleases, but unhappily he does not wish to be long with 
Him. We sometimes lament, that when we are at the 
Altar, we feel no tenderness, or sensible devotion. But do 
we live in great interior recollection ? Do we lead a life 
sufficiently pure ? How can we experience this sensi- 
ble devotion, when we are in continual motion during 
the time of the holy Sacrifice, entirely taken up with 
the external action, and so eager to quit the Altar, that 
we do not give time to Jesus Christ, or allow Him, as 
it were, to make us feel the sweet effects of His pre- 
sence, much less to make His voice heard by us ? 

A little more faith ; a few serious reflections on our 
ministry will easily teach us, how we ought to say 
Mass. We must endeavour to say Mass as Jesus 
Christ would say it. This reflection on the Person of 
Jesus Christ embodies in itself the holiest practices of 
devotion. This thought, which we should recall to 
mind from time to time at the Altar, " I here repre- 
sent Jesus Christ, I speak in the name of Jesus Christ, 
I hold in my hands Jesus Christ," is well fitted to in- 
spire us with that air of sanctity, that serious and 
majestic manner, that divine appearance which this 
action calls for, and which all who are present at it 
expect from us. 

The devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus is a 
powerful means of helping us to say Mass with more 
devotion. Whether it be that this object is more cal- 
culated to move us, or that Jesus Christ has attached 
to this devotion, special and abundant graces, it is cer- 
tain, from the experience of those who practise it, that, 
as soon as persons begin to be earnest in devotion to 
the Sacred Heart, great devotion at the Altar is the 
immediate result. The mere thought of the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus, inspires sentiments, with which we 
were before entirely unacquainted. Faith grows stron- 
ger, and our love for Jesus Christ sensibly increases. 

We must only be mindful, first, to say Mass with 

L 



Digitized by Google 



146 



THIRD PART. 



attention and without hurry. Eagerness to quit the 
Altar, is a clear sign that we do not willingly remain 
with Jesus Christ. We are only required to spend 
a few moments longer at the Altar, and shall we, for so 
little, deprive ourselves, during our whole life, of the 
benefit of the greatest, the holiest, and the most im- 
portant of all our actions. 2dly. To make, every time 
we say Mass, a sort of reparation of honour to Jesus 
Christ, with a view to atone, by the homage we render 
Him in this august Sacrament, for the insults and out- 
rages, which He has endured, and still endures in the 
most Blessed Sacrament. Srdly. To thank Him for all 
the benefits, and all the graces, which He has bestowed 
on the Blessed Virgin. This gratitude is very pleasing 
to Him. 4thly. To ask Him with all simplicity and 
entire confidence for many things, and especially for His 
perfect love. " Lord, make me holy. The glory will be 
Thine. Thou wilt find elsewhere subjects mere worthy 
of Thy graces, than I am, but I dare to say, that Thou 
wilt not find any one, who will endeavour to be more 
grateful. Inverri quern diligit anima mea, tenui mm, 
nec dimittam. Permit me, oh Lord to say to Thee, 
that however great may be the benefits Thou hast 
granted me, Thou hast not yet given me enough, if thou 
hast not given me Thy love. Give me, my divine 
Saviour, a heart like Thine. Give me Thy Heart" 
Truly, a Priest, who does not feel the effects of a 
sacrifice, which has power to cancel the sins of the 
whole world, has great reason to fear. My God ! what 
graces dost Thou not shower on a well-disposed soul ! 
Who can explain the sweetness that Thou makest us 
experience at the Altar. " I have received such great 
graces, and have felt so sensibly, the effects of this 
Bread of Angels," says a person who was truly devout 
to the sacred Heart of Jesus, " That I cannot think of 
them, without being at the same time, touched with 
sensible gratitude. I have conceived in consequence, 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER in. 



147 



a strong confidence, that I will persevere in virtue, 
and in die desire I have of belonging entirely to God, 
notwithstanding the immense difficulties, which I re- 
present to myself in the course of my life. I will say 
Mass every day. This is my hope. This is the only 
foundation of my support. Jesus Christ can do very 
little, if He cannot sustain me, from one day to 
another. He will not fail to reproach me with my 
want of courage, if I begin to despond. He will give 
me every day fresh counsel and fresh strength. He 
will instruct, console, and encourage me, and grant 
me, through the sacrifice of Himself, all the graces 
that I ask. If I do not see that He is present, I feel 
it. It seems to me, that I am like those blind men, 
who threw themselves at His feet, and had no doubt 
< that they touched Him, though they did not see Him." 
This is the manner, in which we ought to say Mass ; 
such are the sentiments we ought to have in the pre- 
sence of Jesus Christ. 

III. Practice for assisting at the Sacrifice of the Mass. 

Those, who hear Mass, should be convinced, that 
there is no action of their lives, which requires more 
respect, attention, and devotion, than this. The Mass 
is, truly, the representation of the Sacrifice of the 
Cross, and at the same time, the true sacrifice of the 
same victim, Who was immolated on Calvary. In the 
Mass, Jesus Christ still offers Himself to His Father 
as a holocaust for the expiation of our sins, and 
applies to us, the price of the Blood which He shed for 
us on the Cross. We ought, on this account, to assist 
at Mass, in the same sentiments, as those we should 
have had, had we been present at the death of our 
Lord on Calvary. Or rather, we should endeavour to 
enter into the sentiments of His Blessed Mother, and 
His beloved disciple at that time. 

Modesty, interior recollection, silence, a humble 

l 2 



Digitized by Google 



148 



THIRD PART. 



posture, and a profound respect, are necessary dis- 
positions ; but they would be useless, unless animated 
by a lively faith. We must believe, and we must often 
reflect on what we believe. We are in a place, sanc- 
tified by the presence of Jesus Christ, and filled with 
the majesty of God, to Whom we are come to offer our 
homage, and to ask from Him the graces we require. 
We assist at a sacrifice, in which Jesus Christ is the 
Victim. This sacrifice is offered for us. Is it pos- 
sible that we should be convinced of this, and not feel 
respect and confidence? We should carefully avoid 
whatever might distract us, from attending to all the 
actions of the Priest. Of all methods of hearing Mass, 
this is the most conformable to the spirit of the Church. 
Vocal prayers are very useful, when they are said with 
devotion. But they should not occupy us, all the time* 
of Mass. Wo should not be always intent on speaking. 
We should sometimes cease, and listen, to hear what 
our Lord says to us. We must imitate the poor, who, 
after stretching out their hands, and making known 
their wants, remain in silence, waiting till an alms 
be given them. This silence during the adorable 
Sacrifice is not idleness, it is the mark of a deep atten- 
tion to the presence of God, and of a humble confidence 
in His mercy. A few serious reflections on what is 
done at the Altar, a few acts of faith in the truth 
of this mystery, will produce in us the holiest sen- 
timents. 

But of all methods of hearing Mass, none is more 
useful than that which is taught us by devotion to the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus. It consists chiefly in interior 
acts. As soon as the Priest has consecrated, animated 
with lively faith, we must adore Jesus Christ, and adore 
Him in the sentiments of a person, who is present only 
to render Him homage, and make Him a sort of repa- 
ration of honour, for all the insults and outrages, 
to which His love has exposed Him, in this august 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER III. 



149 



Sacrament. We must then adore His Sacred Heart, 
and thank our Divine Saviour, for the love which in- 
flames His Sacred Heart, and for all the admirable 
dispositions of His Heart towards us. We must then 
enter into His Divine Heart, to admire all the treasures 
of virtue and of grace which It contains. We shall there 
admire the most profound humility, that it is possible 
to imagine: an heroic patience, undismayed by any 
misfortune : an excessive meekness towards all : the 
infinite grief He felt for our sins, which He vouchsafed 
to take upon Himself. We shall behold an unbounded 
love for the glory of God, His Father, and for all mankind, 
a solicitude, a zeal, an excessive eagerness for their 
salvation, and for mine in particular. We must repre- 
sent to ourselves, what are the sentiments of Jesus 
Christ on that Altar, at the sight of so much contempt 
and so many outrages. Filled with the deepest sen- 
timents of love and gratitude, we must say to Him all 
that grief and love can suggest to a generous and 
grateful heart. By these interior acts, we shall dispose 
ourselves for a spiritual Communion. This consists, 
chiefly, in an ardent desire of really communicating, in 
order to repair, by the respectful and loving manner in 
which we desire to receive Jesus Christ, for the cold- 
ness, the insensibility, and little preparation, with 
which we have hitherto received Him. 

It is extraordinary that there are to be found Chris- 
tians, and those not a few, who grow weary and do not 
know what to do at Mass. Can a sick man be tired of 
seeing the efforts made to cure him ? or can a person, 
loaded with debts, find it difficult to know what to do, 
in presence of a powerful monarch who has offered 
him all his treasures ? You do not know what to do at 
Mass ? How is this ? says Fr. la Colombiere, in his 
Reflections on this subject; have you never received 
any favour from God ? Alas, we are surrounded, loaded, 
overwhelmed with His benefits, and we have never 



Digitized by Google 



150 



THIRD PART. 



thanked Him as we ought. At Mass, at least, give a 
thought to these various benefits ; so many sins over- 
looked, so loving a Providence continually exercised in 
your regard, so sweet and so constant an effort to draw 
you to Him, to gain your heart, to make you holy. 
The graces that you receive in one single day would 
suffice to occupy you during the whole of Mass. Is 
not all this deserving of your remembrance? After 
repassing through your mind all these benefits, say 
with holy confidence to the Eternal Father : " Lord, 
these are the benefits I have received from Thee. But 
Thou seest this Host, this divine Body, this precious 
Blood, this adorable Sacrifice ? This is what I offer 
Thee for so many benefits. I cannot doubt but that 
they are well repaid by so magnificent an offering. 
But what can I render Thee, oh Lord, for having 
given me the means of acknowledging so liberally the 
benefits of Thy Father, the means of expiating ail my 
sins ? I have only one heart to offer Thee. Wilt Thou 
deign to accept this heart, agitated by so many passions, 
and defiled with so many sins ? It is at least broken 
with grief, and in this state I offer it to Thee. Thou 
openest to me Thine own ; shall I dare, my loving 
Saviour, to refuse Thee mine? 0 God of majesty! 
who am I, that Thou shouldst deign to accept the 
sacrifice of my heart? It shall then be all Thine. 
Creatures shall have no part in it. Do Thou, then, 
my loving Jesus, be my Father, my friend, my Lord, 
my All. Since Thou art pleased to be content with my 
heart, how can it desire anything but Thine ? I wish, 
in future, to live only for Thee. Receive then, oh 
loving Saviour of the world, the sacrifice made to Thee 
by the most ungrateful of mankind, to repair the 
injury which, up to this time, I have not ceased to do 
Thee by offending Thee." 

You do not know what to do at Mass ? Have you 
never offended God ? Do you not offend Him every 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTBB IV. 



151 



day, and every hour of the day ? Run over, during 
Mass, all the faults you have committed since the Mass 
of the preceding day, and ask His pardon for them. 
But do you want nothing ? You complain every day of 
your parents, your friends, your children: ask then 
Almighty God to make such a one more reasonable, 
another more modest, another less exasperated ; to 
change the heart of another, to grant yourself more 
meekness, more patience, more courage and more zeal 
for your salvation, and above all, His perfect love. To 
obtain all these graces, offer to Him Jesus Christ as a 
sacrifice. He can never refuse your requests. For 
what you offer is worth infinitely more than all that 
you can ask for. 

It is extraordinary that our Lord can fill His house 
only by using violence, and forcing us, as it were, to 
enter. But it is still more extraordinary that we should 
enter the house of God so often, and assist every day at 
the most august of all sacrifices, and yet draw no fruit 
from it We do not even understand the ineffable ad- 
vantages which we can derive from it. This ignorance 
and negligence is one of the things we have most reason 
to deplore among Christians. What a misfortune, that 
we possess in the midst of us an immense and inex- 
haustible treasure, and that, from not being aware of 
it, we live in indigence ! But if we know this treasure, 
and yet derive no benefit from it, are we not still more 
to be pitied ? 

Chapter IV. 

Practical reflections on Communion. 

As the Blessed Eucharist is the greatest and the most 
august of our sacraments, the frequenting it is the 
most important action of our life, and consequently 
requires the greatest care and application in preparing 



Digitized by Google 



152 



THIRD PART. 



for it. Were we to communicate only once in our life, 
our whole life, however long it might be, would not be 
too long to prepare ourselves worthily for receiving so 
holy and so awful a mystery. This should not, how- 
ever, keep us from it. It should only urge us to ap- 
proach it with the requisite dispositions. We are 
wrong, then, when we say : " I will not communicate, 
because I feel I am unworthy." We should say, on 
the contrary : " I will endeavour, as far as possible, by 
the innocence and regularity of my life, to make myself 
worthy to communicate." To approach worthily, is to 
believe ourselves unworthy ; whilst, at the same time, 
we do what we can to make ourselves less unworthy. 
A single good Communion is enough to make a Saint. 
Not much more is necessary than a good will, and a few 
reflections, in order to make a good Communion. 

Those who communicate often without becoming 
more devout, more mortified, more recollected, without 
loving Jesus Christ more and more, are in a more 
dangerous state than they think. What would have 
been said, if those who often conversed with Jesus 
Christ, and usually ate at His table, had not become 
daily more virtuous ? What further hope would there 
have been for those sick persons who were presented 
to Jesus Christ, if Jesus Christ had not cured them? 
Famine and dearth are not the severest chastisements 
with which God punishes His people. The most ter- 
rible, says the Prophet, is when He threatens so to 
chastise us, that we die of hunger in the midst of an 
abundant harvest. Many bunches of grapes shall be 
pressed, and they shall not yield a drop of wine : Au- 
feram robur panis (Isaiah iii. 1). This is the most 
fearful of all punishments; the bread you eat shall 
have no more nourishment for you. You shall eat 
much, and yet die of languor and weakness. You shall 
die of hunger. Whatever may be our danger from sick- 
ness, there is always some hope as long as we can have 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



153 



recourse to the last remedies. But when the most 
violent have been several times tried without effect, 
what must we think of the sick person ? If we were 
ill, and had repeatedly tried the most powerful remedies 
without effect, we should be filled with alarm, and con- 
sider our death inevitable. We have repeatedly received 
the adorable Body and the precious Blood of Jesus 
Christ without profit. Have we reason to be satisfied ? 
There are many fatal causes from which this misfortune 
may proceed. Each one should examine himself on 
this point. 

The general dispositions which we ought to bring to 
Communion are: profound humility and a sincere 
acknowledgment of our poverty ; a certain spiritual 
hunger, which indicates, at the same time, the need 
we have of this food, and our good dispositions to profit 
by it ; a great purity of heart, an ardent love of Jesus 
Christ, or at least an ardent desire of loving Him, and 
of accomplishing the design which He had in giving 
Himself to us in the Eucharist — namely, to unite us 
intimately to Him by a perfect conformity of heart and 
mind. Those who, at Communion, have no sentiment 
of devotion, no fervour, no tenderness, are certainly 
without some of these dispositions. 

It is an ordinary defect in those who communicate 
often not to make much preparation for communicating 
well. All books contain very useful practices of devo- 
tion for Communion. Each one can choose what suits 
him best. Devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
is suited to all. Experience teaches that there is, per- 
haps, no practice which makes us communicate with 
more devotion. All these practices should be accom- 
panied, by serious and deep reflections, on the admirable 
qualities of the divine food which we are about to 
receive, by generous mortification, by the gifts of the 
Holy Ghost, which are the rewards of perfect mortifiV 
cation ; and lastly, by the imitation of the virtues we 



Digitized by Google 



154 



THIRD PART. 



admire and love in Jesus Christ Let us imagine that 
the Communion, for which we are preparing, is to be 
the last in our lives. Let us prepare, every time, as 
though, on quitting the holy table, we had to pass from 
this life to eternity. If we desire that the sacrament 
of the Eucharist should produce in us sentiments of 
the love of God, let us think of the immense love which 
God has shown us in instituting this mystery, and of 
His design to oblige us thereby to love Him perfectly. 
The reproof of Jesus Christ to Martha for too great 
solicitude, should teach some souls, who are disquieted 
and wholly taken up with reciting many vocal prayers, 
that tranquillity of heart, interior recollection and at- 
tention in listening, from time to time, to Jesus Christ 
in silence, like Magdalen, is the best preparation we 
can make. So that we should employ the greater part 
of the precious time that precedes, accompanies and 
immediately follows Communion, in making many in- 
terior acts, of which the love of Jesus Christ should be 
the principle, and the increase of this love the chief 
effect Let us say some prayers before Communion, 
but let us spend at least a quarter of an hour in 
making profound reflections on the action we are about 
to perform. It is ^ery difficult for a person to be con- 
vinced that he is going to receive Jesus Christ, and 
yet to have no desire of it, not to think of it, and to be 
but little impressed with it The presence of a prince 
in disguise does not in any degree diminish the respect 
due to Him on the part of those who really believe him 
to be the prince. Any signal benefit, any mark of friend- 
ship he may show us under this condition, obliges us to 
love him all the more, especially if he has assumed this 
disguise in order to render us some important service. 
Let us apply this to Jesus Christ Oh Jerusalem, if 
thou didst but know who He is that comes to visit thee, 
and the benefits thou canst derive from this visit! 
Consider particularly that you are about to receive the 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



155 



adorable Body of Jesus Christ, with the sacred wounds 
which He allowed His disciples to touch ; and with this 
adorable Body you are going to receive His Sacred 
Heart. Into this Sacred Heart, Which is open to us, 
we must enter. In this Sacred Heart we must learn 
to pray, to thank God, to praise Him, to annihilate 
ourselves in His presence, but above all, to love Him. 
What wonders does not Jesus Christ work during these 
precious moments in a pure soul, in a soul that really 
loves Him. The mere thought of this divine Heart 
fills us, at that time, with extraordinary devotion. If 
Jesus Christ, in coming to us, gives us sensible marks 
of His presence, as is generally the case with those 
who have a tender devotion to His Sacred Heart, let us 
profit by these precious moments, let us preserve great 
interior recollection, let us listen to our Lord, let us 
allow grace to work. If we do not hinder its operation 
by voluntary distractions, and a kind of dissipation by 
which the devil seeks to make us lose all the fruit of 
Communion, it will work wonders in us. 

The occupation of a fervent soul at this time, should 
be principally, to abandon herself entirely to the love 
of her Divine Saviour, and to enjoy the sweetness of 
His presence. A tender and sincere love is, at the 
same time, the best disposition for Communion, and 
the chief fruit we should draw from it. A soul that 
loves much is generally silent in the presence of Jesus 
Christ, and shows her love for him, by fervent interior 
acts. Magdalen lost in admiration at our Saviour's 
feet, is the model of a soul that has communicated. 
If she speaks, her words must only be expressions of 
her love, her admiration, and her joy. 

We may say from time to time, " Invent quern diligit 
anima mea, tenui eum, nec dimittam. I have found 
Him Whom my soul loveth. I have held Him, and I 
will never separate myself from Him." At other times, 
" Deus mem et omnia ; My God and my All. Dilectus 



Digitized by Google 



156 



THIRD PART. 



meus mihi, et ego iUi ; My beloved to me, and I to Him. 
Quid mihi est in ccelo, et a te quid volui super terrain, 
Deus cordis mei, et pars mea Deus in ceternum. What 
have I in Heaven ? and besides Thee, what do I desire 
upon Earth ? The God of my heart, and the God that 
is my portion for ever. Pone me ut signaculum super 
cor tuum. Put me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal 
upon thy arm." We must endeavour at that time, to 
enter into the sentiments of Jesus Christ, and con- 
sider what displeases Him in us, what are His designs 
upon us, what He wills we should do, and what can 
hinder us in future from doing what He desires. Let 
us remain in spirit at His feet, and renewing from 
time to time, our faith in the presence of Jesus Christ, 
let us adore Him with profound respect, mingled with 
fear, seeing that this God of Majesty, before Whom the 
Seraphim tremble, humbles Himself as far as to dwell 
in the heart of a mortal man and a sinner : that for 
this purpose. He destroys the laws of nature, and works 
such stupendous miracles. Then passing from sen- 
timents of admiration to those of gratitude, let us, with 
a sense of our absolute incapability of testifying it 
sufficiently to our Lord, invite all creatures to bless 
Him with us. Let us offer to Him the love which all 
the Blessed feel for Him, and the fervour with which 
so many holy souls communicate. Let us offer Him, 
His own Heart, with the immense love that inflames it. 
Let us then unfold to Him, with great confidence and 
sincerity, our weaknesses, our miseries, and our wants. 
Ecce quern amas infirmatur, we may say with Martha : 
"Alas, Lord ! he whom Thou lovest so tenderly, is sick. 
Can I doubt of Thy love, after all Thou hast done for 
me, and all that Thou now dost ? If thou lovest me, 
canst Thou see my infirmities and not heal them? 
But, above all, canst Thou see that I love Thee so 
little, without inflaming my heart with the sacred fire 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



157 



of Thy love? Even though Thou shouldst refuse me all 
the rest, couldst Thou deny me Thy perfect love ? I 
know that I have put great obstacles to Thy designs 
in my behalf. But do Thou begin, Thyself, I beg of 
Thee, by removing those obstacles." 

Let us never fail, at each Communion that we make, 
to offer some pleasing sacrifice to Jesus Christ. Let 
us promise Him to apply ourselves to correct some 
defect, which we know to be greatly displeasing to Him. 
Let us bear in mind, that we shall never feel the sen- 
sible effects of Communion, if we are net careful to 
spend the rest of the day, in great interior recollection. 
Coldness, sloth, and dissipation of mind, immediately 
after Communion, can never be habitual in those who 
communicate often, without being, at the same time, 
fatal signs of the unhappy state of a soul, which is 
insensible to the greatest of all benefits, and has 
therefore the more reason to fear, in proportion as she 
has less apprehension of the unhappy state of tepidity, 
in which she lives, and of the false security with which 
she seeks to tranquillize herself. 

St. Bonaventure (Process vii., Kelig. c. 12,) dis- 
tinguishes eight different motives, which may lead the 
faithful to receive holy Communion. Some communi- 
cate, says this holy Doctor, because, being sensible of 
their infirmities, they are desirous of being visited by 
the physician, Who alone has power to cure them. 
Others, because, having sinned greatly, they have 
nothing to offer, more acceptable to the Divine justice, 
than this sacred Host, this Immaculate Lamb, Who 
takes away the sins of the world. Others, oppressed 
with grief, or attacked by violent temptations, because, 
there is no one to whom they can have recourse, but 
to a strong and powerful God, Who is always ready to 
assist and defend them. Others, because they desire 
to obtain some grace from the Eternal Father, and 
hope to obtain it, through the merits of His Son, our 



Digitized by Google 



158 



THIRD PART. 



only Mediator. Some have no other intention in this 
holy action, but to offer our Lord the chalice of salva- 
tion, out of gratitude for the benefits they have received 
from His hand. Many desire to honour God and His 
Saints, by making this oblation to God, in honour of his 
Saints. Some, urged by charity for their brethren, 
living or dead, make use of the Blood of Jesus Christ, 
to obtain, for the living, the pardon of their sins, and 
for the dead, relief in their sufferings. Lastly, others, 
inflamed with a sincere desire of loving our Blessed 
Saviour, receive Him in the Adorable Eucharist, in 
order that they may be wholly inflamed with His love. 
This motive, we may say, is the most perfect, and the 
most conformable to the designs of Jesus Christ, in 
giving Himself to us. 

Our divine Saviour comes to us, in order to unite us 
closely to Him. He opens His Heart to us, He gives 
it to us : shall we dare to refuse Him ours ? Let us 
enter into this loving Heart, and as It comes to us, let 
It in future take the place of our own, that we may no 
longer have any sentiments but His. But let us enter 
well into these sentiments. Let us consider what 
Jesus Christ loves, what He esteems, and what He 
despises. We cannot doubt that He judges wisely of 
things, and that we deceive ourselves, when we judge 
differently from Him. What idea, then, has He of 
those honours, those riches, those pleasures, which I 
as passionately seek after ? On the contrary, are not 
. those crosses, which I abhor, the object of His com- 
placency ? They are the only objects of His esteem. 

By such reflections as these, it will be easy for us to 
ascertain whether the Heart of Jesus Christ be united 
to ours, whether we have truly the spirit of Jesus 
Christ. We will explain the matter more fully. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER V. 



159 



Chapter V. 

What are the marks of the perfect love of Jesus Christ, 
and of true devotion to His Sacred Heart. 

Marks of a true love for Jesus Christ are the qualities, 
opposite to the defects, we have enumerated above, in 
the second Chapter of the second Part. Jesus Christ 
is the object, and at the same time, the source of solid 
virtue. He is also the most perfect model. Whatever 
is not conformed to His example, does not deserve the 
name of virtue. There is little doubt, but that the 
imperfections noticed in devout persons have done great 
injury to solid piety. Some, who pass for devout, are 
observed to be full of self-love, puffed up with self- 
esteem, and ready to resent the smallest slights. Some, 
appear continually melancholy, obstinate, anxious, and 
sometimes, even furious with passion. Others there 
are whom, at the same time that they are in want of 
nothing, the fear of injuring their health in the slightest 
degree renders idle, negligent, useless, excessively 
indulgent to themselves, and always severe with others. 
Hence it is, that many are in the habit of looking at 
virtue only, through the imperfections of those, who 
pass for spiritual persons. They think, that no one 
can be devout, without being melancholy, secluded, 
obstinate, troublesome, a lover of himself, and ex- 
ceedingly disagreeable. The high esteem in which 
true piety was once held, is lost in consequence of the 
low idea which is formed of it. The most licentious 
have persuaded themselves that it was no great mis- 
fortune to be deprived of virtue, when they see it 
united with so many defects in the greater number, who 
make profession of it. Although the imperfections of 
some afford no real excuse for the vices of others, they 
tend, without doubt, to disgust many. Dissatisfied with 
a life so little in accordance with the idea, which had 



Digitized by Google 



160 



THIRD PART. 



been presented to them of devotion, they imagined, 
either, that the virtue of those who really love Jesus 
Christ is not true, or that it is impossible to practise 
true virtue. We do not undertake here to refute so 
false an opinion. The Saints overthrow it sufficiently 
by the sanctity of their lives, and we will content our- 
selves with showing, in a few words, who are the 
solidly virtuous, by giving the sure marks of true 
devotion, and describing the character of a person who 
loves Jesus Christ perfectly. 

I. Character of one who has a true love for Jesus Christ 

The description given us by St. Paul is the most just 
and natural. The true love of Jesus Christ, says this 
Apostle, without which, even though we had given our 
property to feed the poor, and our bodies to be burnt, 
we should have done nothing, is patient, is kind, is not 
envious, is not rash nor inconsiderate, is not puffed 
up with pride, is not disdainful; seeks not its own 
interests, is not provoked to anger, thinks no evil; 
bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, 
ensures all things. This is the true description of solid 
virtue and devotion. If one only of these qualities is 
wanting, devotion is imperfect ; there is an imperfect 
love of Jesus Christ. Hence, a person of solid virtue, 
one who truly loves Jesus Christ, is one without self- 
love, without disguise, without ambition ; one who is, 
at all times, severe to himself, pardoning himself no- 
thing, and thoroughly kind to others, in whose favour 
he excuses everything ; affable, without affectation ; con- 
descending, without baseness ; obliging, without interest ; 
strictly exact, though without being scrupulous ; con- 
stantly united to God, without constraint ; never idle, 
yet never appearing too busily engaged; never too 
much occupied, and yet less distracted in business 
than others, because he keeps his heart free., occupying 
it only with its great affair, the affair of its salvation. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER V. 



161 



Full of a low opinion of himself, he has nothing but 
esteem for others; for he beholds in them only the 
virtues they possess, and in himself only his own 
defects. Supernatural maxims his only guide, he 
thinks that those who despise him do him no injury, 
because he does not consider the honour which they 
refuse him to be his due. Lastly, he is never in ill- 
humour, because he has always what he desires. As 
he never desires what he has not, he is always content, 
always peaceful, always equal. Prosperity does not 
puff him up, and misfortunes, however severe, do not 
cast him down, because he knows that from the same 
Hand come the goods and evils of life. As the will of 
God is his only rule of life, he always does what God 
wills, and wills always what God does. 

On this account, actions which make most noise 
have no attraction for him. Convinced that what we 
do has no merit, except so far as it is conformable to 
what God wills, he does not trouble himself to do much, 
provided he does perfectly what is pleasing to His sove- 
reign Lord. For this reason, full of diffidence in his 
own natural disposition, his inclinations and his self- 
love, he prefers the smallest duties of his state to the 
greatest actions of his own choice and taste. Animated 
by this spirit of Jesus Christ, he is as perfectly resigned 
in the privation of those talents which it has not pleased 
God to give him, of the virtues which God does not call 
him to practise, and of the good which He does not 
require him to do, as he is faithful in receiving the 
graces God offers him, in practising the virtues, and in 
doing the good works, of which He gives him the oppor- 
tunity, and grants him the desire. Lastly, he is one 
who distinguishes himself from others by his meekness, 
his humility, his ardent love for Jesus Christ, his tender 
affection for the Blessed Virgin, and by a certain ap- 
pearance of modesty and odour of sanctity which never 
fails to be recognized and admired. He is one whom 

M 



Digitized by Google 



162 



THIRD PART. 



the use of the Sacraments continually makes more 
holy, and who is constantly more and more inflamed 
with that thirst after justice of which Jesus Christ 
speaks. Full of faith, he never assists at our sacred 
mysteries without the deepest sentiments of gratitude, 
of love, and profound respect. He seeks God without 
interruption and without dissimulation. He knows not 
what it is to he sparing with a God, Who gives us all, 
Who gives Himself wholly to us, without reserve, in 
order to oblige us to refuse Him nothing. In fine, he 
is one who is perfectly mortified at all times, at every 
period of life, and in all conditions, because he is con- 
vinced that in all things Jesus Christ crucified is his 
model For this reason, full of His spirit, he aims at 
nothing but directing, on every occasion, both in prayer 
and in action, all his intentions and all his thoughts to 
the simple view of God, Who is the sole object that 
occupies him. He centres in God all the motions o£ 
his heart by a simple and loving resignation to His 
holy will. This is the character of true and solid 
virtue which Jesus Christ Himself has given us, which 
all the Saints have so well copied in their lives, and 
which alone has constituted the sanctity and the merit 
of all the Saints. This is the faithful portrait of one 
who has a true love for Jesus Christ. From this we ; 
see at once how false it is that true virtue is disagree- 
able and forbidding ; that persons of solid piety are 
unaccommodating, melancholy, impatient, troublesome, 
full of self-love, jealousy, and ambition. It will appear 
yet moire clearly what an injury is done to true piety, 
and what prejudice is created in the minds of the faith- 
ful, by those who, with a reputation for devotion, 
nourish in themselves such serious imperfections, and