 should be unprofitable to me. Touch my 
heart efficaciously, oh my divine Saviour. Though I 
am ungrateful and unworthy of Thy love, Thou dost 
not cease to love me. Thou didst love me when I loved 
Thee not, when I did not eve^n wish that Thou shouldst 
love me. But now that I wish it, grant me what I ask 
of Thee. I give Thee my heart, place me within Thine. 
Grant that this moment may be that of my conversion, 
that I may begin to love Thee, never again to cease 
doing so ; that I may be wholly dedicated to Thy love 
as Thy slave ; that I may die to myself to have no 
longer any life but for Thee, and in Thee. Amen, 

Act of Adoration to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ, which 
may be made at any time, but principally in the morning at 
the time of prayer, and at night before retiring to rest, 

Jesus Christ, my Lord and my God, Whom I believe 
to be really and truly present in the Blessed Sacrament of 
the Altar, receive this act of most profound adoration, 
to supply for the desire I feel, of adoring Thee con- 
tinually, and in thanksgiving for the sentiments of love 
which Thy Divine Heart therein entertains for me. I 
offer Thee all the acts of adoration, resignation, patience, 
and love which Thy Sacred Heart made during Thy 
mortal life on earth, and still makes, and will make 
eternally in Heaven, in order that I may adore Thee, 
love Thee and praise Thee, as far as is possible to me, 
by means of this Sacred Heart, during the whole time 
of my life. Open to me Thy Sacred Heart : It shall 
be in future the place of my refuge and repose. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VIII. 



Act of Contrition. 

Oh my Saviour and my God, Whose Heart, pierced 
with love and grief, did feel such sorrow for the sins of 
the whole world, why cannot I feel the same grief which 
I have caused Thee by mine ? Supply, I beg of Thee, 
by the contrition Thou didst feel, for what is wanting to 
me. Imprint in my heart a horror and fear of the 
slightest offences. Change and remodel this unhappy 
heart after Thy own, which is infinitely pure, infinitely 
holy, and always inflamed with the love of Thy Heavenly 
Father. I protest that I wish to love nothing in future 
but what He loves, and to detest everything that dis- 
pleases Him. Amen. 

Offering that may be made during the time of Mass. 

As the Mass is the sacrifice of love, in which the 
Heart of Jesus Christ offers Itself for us, and con- 
tinually immolates Itself to His Father, it is principally 
in assisting at this mystery, that we should love and 
adore this Sacred Heart, and especially after the Con- 
secration, considering what thoughts Jesus Christ can 
entertain of us, and those that He has for us — namely, 
the disposition of His Heart, His designs, and His 
desired. Filled with a sincere feeling of gratitude and 
affection, we may make the following act : — 
• Eternal Father, permit me to offer Thee the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus Christ, Thy beloved Son, as He offers 
Himself to Thee in sacrifice. Keceive, if it be pleasing 
to Thee, for me, all the desires, all the sentiments, all 
the affections, all the emotions, all the acts of this 
Sacred Heart. They are all mine, because He offers 
Himself for me : they are mine because I desire to 
have in future none but His : receive them in satisfac- 
tion for all my sins, and in thanksgiving for all Thy 
benefits. Receive them to grant me through their 
merit all the graces which are necessary for me, and 



Digitized by Google 



198 



THIRD PART. 



especially final perseverance. Receive them, lastly, as 
so many acts of love, adoration, and praise which 
I offer to Thy Divine Majesty ; for through Him alone 
Thou art worthily loved, honoured, and glorified. 
Quoniam per ipsum, et cum ipso et in ipso est tibi Deo 
Patri omnipotent in unitate Spiritus Sancti, omnis honor 
et gloria. 

Prayer which St. Gertrude recited every day in honour of the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ 

I salute Thee, oh Sacred Heart of Jesus, living, 
vivifying fountain of eternal life, infinite treasure of 
the Divinity, burning furnace of Divine love. Thou art 
the place of my repose and my refuge. Oh my beloved 
Saviour, inflame my heart with the ardent love which 
inflames Thine ; pour into my heart the great graces, 
of which Thine is the source, and grant that my heart 
may be really united to Thine, that Thy will may be 
mine, and that mine may be eternally conformed to 
Thine ; for I desire that, in future, Thy holy will may* 
be the rule of all my desires, and of all my actions. 
Amen. 

Act of Love. 

I have nothing, oh my loving Saviour and my God ; 
I have nothing that can please Thee, I can do nothing, 
I am nothing ; but I have a heart, and that suffices. 
My health, my honour, and my life may be taken from 
me, but no one can ever take from me my heart. I 
have a heart, and with this heart I can love Thee, oh 
my adorable Jesus, and with this heart I desire to love 
Thee. O my God, I wish to love Thee, and always to 
love Thee, and for no other reason than to love Thee 
always. 

END OF THE THIRD PART. 



Digitized by Google 



199 



MEDITATIONS FOR THE FEAST 

OF THE 

SACRED HEART OF JESUS, 

For each Friday of the month, and for certain days of the 
year, more especially consecrated to the honour of the 
Sacred Heart of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

The two Meditations that follow have been given at 
length, to facilitate their use by all sorts of persons, and 
by those also, who say they do not know how to meditate* 
I ask these last, only to read them with attention, re- 
flecting on what they have read, and I hope that they 
will find that this reading has not been altogether use- 
less, since, when accompanied with the affectionate sen- 
timents towards Jesus Christ, with which grace, will not 
fail to inspire our hearts, it will be a true prayer. Those 
to whom the habit of prayer is familiar, can content 
themselves with looking over the subject of each point. 

Meditation for the First Friday after the 
Octave of the Blessed Sacrament. 

On the incomprehensible love shown us by Jesus Christ in 
the most Blessed Sacrament of the Altar. 

The subject of this Meditation is the incomprehensible 
love shown us by Jesus Christ in the Adorable Sacra- 
ment of the Altar, where He is so little known to men, 
and still less loved, even by those to whom He is known. 



Digitized by Google 



200 



MEDITATIONS. 



The end that we should propose to ourselves in this 
Meditation, and which should be its fruit, is to have a 
most lively feeling of the extreme ingratitude of men, 
the greater part of whom are insensible to the evident 
marks of this ardent love, in order to repair, by a return 
of love, by our adorations, and by every kind of homage, 
all the insults that the adorable Heart of Jesus Christ 
has received, until now, in the most Blessed Sacrament. 

The subject of the three points may be taken from 
three motives, or three desires of Jesus Christ, in the 
institution of this mystery. 

1. The excessive, desire that Jesus Christ has had to 
be always with us. 

' 2. The desire He has to make us partakers of all 
His benefits. 

8. The desire He has to be closely united to us, 
though men are insensible to the proofs of so ardent 
a love. 

1. Prelude. We may represent to ourselves the upper- 
chamber in which the Son of God, seated in the midst 
of His Disciples, instituted this adorable mystery, the 
contempt to which He exposed Himself, even at that 
time, in communicating, the traitor Judas, not being 
able to deter Him for a single moment, from the institu- 
tion of this mystery of love. 

2. Prelude. Convinced, by an act of faith, of the 
truth of this adorable mystery, and disposed, by an act 
of contrition, to receive the lights and graces, which God 
is ready to grant on this occasion, let us ask of the 
Holy Ghost, in the name of Jesus Christ Himself, and 
through the intercession of the Blessed Virgin, and of 
our Angel Guardian > the grace to conceive a great 
sorrow for so much contempt and ingratitude, pene- 
trating deeply into the loving sentiments of the Heart 
of Jesus Christ in the Blessed Sacrament. 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



201: 



First Point. — The ardent desire Jesus Christ feels to be 
with us. 

. Consider that the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ was 
no sooner formed within the womb of the Blessed Virgin, 
than it was inflamed with an immense love for all men ; 
but, as it is the property of love, to desire to be con- 
tinually with those, for whom this love is felt, a life of 
thirty-three years appeared to Him too short, to satisfy 
His excessive desire of being continually with us. It 
was necessary to work the greatest of miracles, to con- 
tent the greatest of all desires. This Heart could not 
place limits to the excess of Its love. Be not afflicted, 
oh my Apostles, said our loving Jesus, if I am obliged 
to leave you to ascend to Heaven ; my Heart desires 
with more ardour to be with you, than you desire to be 
with Me, and as long as there are men upon earth I 
shall be with them : Ecce ego vobiscum sum usque ad 
conmmmatioiiem saculi. All the motives that led the 
Son of God to clothe Himself with our flesh have 
ceased. The work of Redemption is fulfilled. Nothing 
but His excessive desire of being continually with us, 
obliges Him to work this constant miracle, and this 
compendium of all His wonders; His immense love 
making it, as it were, impossible to Him to be sepa- 
rated from us. Jesus has ascended to His Father: 
why does He every day return invisibly on earth, if 
not because He cannot separate Himself from men, 
and His delights are to be with us ? Who would ever 
have thought that Jesus Christ could have loved us to 
this excess ? From the greatest height of glory, He 
desires to come and dwell in our hearts, as if something 
were wanting to His felicity, when He is at a distance 
from us. A desire must be very violent, when it cannot 
be satisfied in Heaven, where all desires are fulfilled. 
Jesus Christ must love men passionately, since not 
restrained, by the great glory He has enjoyed since Hia 



Digitized by Google 



202 



MEDITATIONS. 



Ascension, He every day places Himself, in a humble, 
and obscure state on our Altars, to satisfy the excess of 
His love and of His tenderness ; proving to us the truth 
of what He had said by His Prophet, that His delights 
are to be with us : Delicto mea esse cum Jiliis hominum. 

Reflections. 

1. These are the tender sentiments, with which the 
love that inflames His Sacred Heart, inspires Jesus 
Christ ; but what must be His sentiments, seeing the 
forgetfulness and indifference of those, whom He loves, 
to such an excess, and who love Him so little ? 

2. Jesus Christ has no need of men, and yet He 
loves them to such a degree, that He counts it at 
nothing, to be shut up within a Host, until the end of 
ages, for the sake of the pleasure He has in being with 
us. Men, on the contrary, cannot do without Jesus 
Christ, and yet they love Him so little, that they think 
nothing of this prodigy, so little do they value the 
felicity of conversing with Him. 

3. What were the sentiments of Jesus Christ, when 
He saw Himself abandoned by a whole people, whom 
He had loaded with benefits, and even by His most 
zealous disciples ? What must be the sentiments of 
this blessed Saviour in the Adorable Sacrament of the 
Altar, where, for the greater part of the day, He is fbr~ 
saken by all, and where perhaps so many religion* 
persons, who possess Him in their own house, visit 
Him so rarely ? 

4. Jesus Christ dwells corporally amongst us, and 
there is no concourse in the places where He resides t 
All the places of amusement, all the public squares are 
full of people. There is always a crowd in the palaces 
of the great ; time is always found for visiting them, 
though they are scarcely ever in so amiable a mood as 
to be pleased with the services rendered them ; Ego 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



903 



autem reUcim sum solus; while Jesus Christ is left 
alone in the Churches, though He never refuses any 
one, and receives with exceeding mildness and joy all 
who approach Him. Foetus sum, He says, complain- 
ing by the mouth of His prophet, sicut passer solitarius 
in tecto. I am left alone in My Churches, and no one 
can find half a quarter of an hour, to honour Me in the 
Blessed Sacrament of the Altar. 

5. Visits among men are so ordinary and so frequent ; 
it is only this loving Jesus Who is not visited. 

6. If sweetness in conversation, or interest attracts 
ifs, what conversation is there sweeter or more useful 
than that which we have with the most amiable and 
most powerful person in the world, and Who loves us 
more than any other? Non enim habet amaritucUnem 
conversatio iUius, nee tedium convictus iUius, sed latitiam 
et gaudium (Sap. v. 18). His conversation has neither 
sadness nor weariness ; those chosen souls give testi* 
mony of it, who are always immersed in sweetness in 
His presence, and who would willingly pass whole days 
and nights at the foot of His Altars. 

7. Beloved Jesus, what must be the sentiments of 
Thy Heart, seeing the insensibility and the ingratitude 
of man ? Thou ofFerest Thyself for them many times 
every day in sacrifice on our Altars, and one half hour 
spent in this solemn offering seems to them too long ; 
they are compelled to relieve their weariness and the 
annoyance they feel by continual distraotions of mind. 

8. Ungrateful men ! You do not know Him Who 
continually dwells in the midst of you : Medius ves- 
trum stetit, quern vos nescitis (John i. 26). If we do 
not know Jesus Christ, we are lost without remedy, for 
eternal life consists in knowing Him. But what hope 
can there be, if when we know Him, we do not love 
Him? 

9. Can we say that we love Him ? Should we be 
satisfied, if He loved us no more than we love Him ? 



Digitized by Google 



304 



MEDITATIONS. 



Should we not desire to be better loved by men than we 
ourselves love Jesus Christ? Would it be sufficient 
if our friends showed us no more affection than we 
evince towards this loving Saviour ? Should we desire 
that persons, whom we think we have obliged, should 
feel for us the same gratitude we show Him ? And 
should we allow our children and our servants, to be as 
little respectful in our presence, as we are, in the pre- 
sence of Jesus Christ in His Churches, at the foot of 
His Altars ? My God, the Angels surround these 
Altars in crowds, to adore and love this Adorable 
Jesus, though He is not in the Blessed Sacrament for 
them. Men, for whom alone He has wrought this 
miracle, do not condescend to visit Him. ObUvioni 
datus sum tamquam mortuns a corde (Ps. xxx. 23). 

Lord ! Who, to satisfy Thy excessive desire of being 
with me, hast invented this miracle, what sentiments 
hast Thou of the forgetfulness I have hitherto shown 
towards Thee ? Is this my correspondence with Thy 
love? There is no man whom, if he had the least 
goodwill towards Me, I should not have visited more 
willingly and more frequently. There is no creature 
that I should not have loved more. I have forgotten 
Thee, oh Lord, and hitherto I have not loved Thee ; 
what can I expect, ungrateful and unfaithful as I am ? 
That Thou shouldst think of me? And when hast 
Thou ever ceased to do it? Have I not reason to 
expect that my wanderings, my insensibility, my for- 
getfulness, and my ingratitude, might oblige Thee to 
think of me no more. Ah, my beloved Saviour, re- 
member this. I have given Thee so many reasons for 
forgetting me, for despising me, and for only remember- 
ing me, in order to cast me into hell. Thou hast not 
done it. God of goodness, I thank Thee, and in future 
I desire to serve Thee better. I humbly ask pardon of 
Thee for my ingratitude towards Thee. I hope that, by 
Thy grace, I shall repair in future, by my assiduity m. 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



205 



visiting Thee, in this adorable mystery, the loss I have 
sustained by my indifference ; and that if Thy Temple 
is not my usual habitation, I shall at least have a secure 
refuge in Thy Adorable Heart, which I choose at this 
moment for my habitation, and which I desire no more 
to quit : Hie habitabo, quontam elegi earn (Ps. exxxi. 14). 

Second Point. — The excessive desire of Jesus Christ to 
make us partakers of His blessings. 

Consider, that as Jesus Christ is the source of all 
goods, He wished to dwell among us, only to be ready 
at all times, to make us partakers of His treasures. 
And this loving Saviour has not only desired to make 
us, in this adorable Sacrament, partaker^ of all the 
blessings of which He is the source, but He has willed, 
in giving Himself, to give us the very fountain of all 
blessings. Ostendam tibi omne bonum, quid enim bonum 
*qus nisi frummtum electorum? (St. Bern.) I will 
bestow on you all sorts of benefits, but where else can 
you find all sorts of blessings upon earth, except in 
the most blessed Sacrament ? The princes of the earth 
display their liberality, only at certain times, and to 
certain persons. Jesus Christ, in the Blessed Sacra- 
ment, gives all, at all times, and to all persons. Venite 
ad me omnes qui laboratis et onerati estis. It might be 
said, that we must be poor and afflicted, to have a right 
to draw near to this fountain of every good, and of 
all graces : that it suffices to be unhappy to be well 
received. Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis. This G&& 
of goodness, foreseeing our weakness and our infirmities, 
gives Himself to us, for food to repair our strength, and 
to be a sovereign remedy against all our evils. Et 
ego reficiam vos. Why do you weep, says this loving 
Saviour continually to us, and why are you grieved 
at the loss of your health, of your children, or of your 
property ? Our fles ? quare non comedis, et quamobrem 
afficitur cor tuum ? Numquid non ego melior tibi sum, 



Digitized by Google 



806 



MEDITATIONS. 



quam decern filii? (1 Reg. v. 8.) Do you not find 
in Me all these goods, and even more? It did not 
satisfy the love our divine Saviour bears us, only 
to open to us His Divine Heart, and to pour on us His 
blessings and graces. He desires to be also our 
strength and our shield, against all the efforts of our 
mortal enemies. Parasti in conspectu meo, mensam, 
adversus eos qui tribulant me. (Ps. xii. 25.) Lastly, 
what more could Jesus Christ give us ? What present 
could He make us, that He has not made, in giving 
Himself to us ? Quomodo non etiam cum iUo, omnia 
mobis donavit. (Rom. viii. 32). 

Reflections. 

1. This divine Saviour comes to us full of goodness, 
of love, and of the most ardent love, and we go to 
Him daily, with coldness and indifference. He comes 
to us, loaded with graces and treasures to enrich us, 
and how long shall we go to Him, with our hands 
empty of good works, and with our hearts so filled with 
the love of creatures, that they cannot have any share in 
the great liberality of this divine Saviour ? 

2. There is no blessing which Jesus Christ has not 
given us, in giving Himself in the blessed Eucharist ; 
and there is no irreverence, no outrage, that has not 
been offered to Jesus Christ in this august Sacrament. 

3. Sacratissimum Corpus meum in cibum, et pretiosum 
Sanguinem in potum tibi reliqui, et foetus sum oppro- 
brium hominum, et abjectio plebis. (Bios. Marg. ch. xix., 
num. 4). He is despised only because He has done 
us too much good, because He has loved us too much. 

4. The house and the person, of the vilest and most 
wicked of men, would have been treated with more 
respect, than His Temples and His Sacred Body have 
received. 

6. Love has obliged Jesus Christ to conceal Himself, 
to come down upon our Altars, but to what does He 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



207 



expose Himself, by coming thus disguised ? How much 
contempt, how many insults is He obliged to endure 
daily, from bad Christians, and from infidels. How 
many licentious men, how many heretics treat Him on 
our Altars, as if He were a mock divinity, renewing all 
the outrages that He suffered in His Passion, on account 
of the royalty to which He laid claim. 

6. The Jews exercised less cruelty towards His 
Person, than is exercised daily, towards His sacred 
Body. The consecrated Hosts have been trodden 
under foot, they have been pierced with a thousand 
blows, they have been broken in pieces and burnt; 
without speaking of the execrable uses, to which they 
have been put, and which we cannot think of without 
horror. 

7. The choice which Jesus Christ had made of the 
insults and outrages He received in Jerusalem, took 
away their bitterness ; but who would dare to think 
that this Heart, which has ouly placed Itself in this 
condition to be more loved and honoured by men, could 
regard with indulgence the extraordinary contempt 
that is shown Him ? 

" 8. We feel compassion for a man that is despised 
and ill-treated. Jesus Christ is the only one to whose 
outrages we are insensible ; it even seems as if every 
one took pleasure in ill-treating Him. 

9. We make a child keep silence, if it cries or makes 
a noise, in the house of a person of quality, whom we 
are visiting, and we accustom it, by a sinful indulgence, 
to be ill-behaved in the Church, as soon as it can walk. 
We stand in Church, we laugh, we talk without re- 
straint, even during the holy Sacrifice. We are more 
modest in a place of amusement : we are more 
attentive at a play, than at the celebration of these 
adorable mysteries. Young men carry their insolence 
to the foot of the Altar, and even glory in it : while 



Digitized by Google 



208 



MEDITATIONS. 



the Turks do not dare to raise their eyes in their 
mosques, in which to laugh or talk would be a crime 
punishable with death. 

10. How many houses in these times, are most 
richly furnished ! How many persons would be 
ashamed to wear the shabby ornaments, on which 
the Body of Jesus Christ reposes ! 

11. What answer could we make to heretics, if in 
reproving us for our immodesty in Church, they boasted 
of being more religious than we ? If you believe that 
Jesus Christ is on that Altar in that Host, you who 
understand so well the rules of propriety and of civility, 
you who are so guarded, I do not say in the palaces and 
antechambers of the great, but in the houses of your 
friends, if you believe, how comes it that you lose so 
completely all respect for your God ? We have nothing 
but contempt for your sacraments, might a heretic say 
to us, but do you not yourselves teach us to despise 
them? 

12. It cannot be denied that the Gentiles treated 
with respect, even the most profane ceremonies. 
Christians have the most holy of all mysteries and 
they do not cease to profane them ! Which merit the 
severer judgment ? those who have been religious 
even to superstition, or those who have been impious 
even to sacrilege ? And have we not reason to fear, 
that these infidels will one day be our accusers ? 

13. All agree that this is the most enormous of all 
acts of ingratitude: we feel horror when we think of 
it, and yet we are witnesses of all this impiety ; some- 
times perhaps we have authority over those who are 
guilty of it, and we allow it, and are insensible to 
this forgetfulness, this indifference, these outrages, 
these profanations, these sacrileges ? 

14. Jesus Christ, always full of compassion for our 
miseries, is continually despised, outraged, and pro* 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



909 



faned by all sorts of persons, and who troubles himself 
about it, or has any feeling of it ? 

Oh hardness ! oh insensibility of the hearts of men ! 
Oh most adorable and most amiable Heart of my 
beloved Jesus ! Heart worthy of the respect and adora- 
tions of men and angels : Heart truly worthy to 
possess all hearts, to reign over all hearts ; what must 
be Thy sentiments at the sight of so many outrages ? 
But, what ought to be the sentiments of my heart, 
seeing Thee so ill-treated ? Thou seest Lord, what 
feeling I have of all these indignities. Humbly pros- 
trate here before Thee, I make a reparation to Thine 
honour, and I humbly ask pardon for them. Why 
cannot I in some measure, repair so many outrages that 
have been committed, or at least, prevent others from 
being offered Thee. But, my beloved Saviour, all my 
desires are useless, if I were to shed all my blood I 
could not hinder either one or the other, but at least I 
have a heart capable of loving Thee, capable of offering 
Thee homage : and this, my Saviour, is what consoles 
me. I have a heart, and this heart shall love Thee, 
and shall love nothing in future but Thee. I offer 
Thee, with this heart, all the desires and emotions 
of which it is capable. I offer Thee, oh my Saviour, 
all that I can do, aided by Thy grace; all that can 
please Thee, all that can honour Thee. I invite and 
numbly beseech all the angels, all the Blessed, and 
also Thy own Blessed Mother to supply for my weak- 
ness and my desires. I beg them to honour Thee, 
praise Thee, adore Thee, and love Thee for me, and for 
all men. Permit me, in order to honour Thee worthily, 
to offer Thee Thyself: for I may say that Thou art 
mine, and that in future all Thy desires shall be mine. 
I will praise Thee, oh beloved Jesus, and I will publish 
everywhere, that thou alone oughtest to be loved, 
served, praised, and honoured eternally. 

p 



Digitized by Google 



210 



MEDITATIONS. 



Third Point. — The excessive desire of Jesus Christ to be 
united with us. 

Consider that the union of hearts is the uttermost 
effect of love : and yet this has been the intention of Jesus 
Christ, in instituting this august Sacrament, in which 
all His actions are those of a passionate lover of men ; 
for in this Sacrament love makes Him, as it were, go 
out of Himself, to live no more but in the beloved 
object. Mysterium unitatis nostra in hoc mensa don- 
secravit, says St. Augustin. This Sacrament is a 
mystery of union. It is true that by the Incarnation, 
Almighty Grod has united Himself perfectly to our 
nature : but this hypostatic union was not the end of 
His Incarnation, as the sacramental union was the end 
of the institution of the Blessed Sacrament. He 
united Himself to our nature, to have a body capable of 
the sufferings He desired to endure for us : but He 
gives Himself to us in the Eucharist, only to unite 
Himself intimately to us. He invites us to this ban- 
quet by His promises. Venite ad me o?nne$, et ego 
rejiciam vos. He induces us to go by His threats. 
Nisi manducaveritis carnem Filii hominis, non habe- 
bitis vitam in vobis. He commands that we should be 
made to enter as it were by force : CompeUe intrare. 
Lastly, He does every thing to inflame us with a great 
desire of going to Him, that there may be nothing to 
oppose that which possesses Him of coming to us, 
and being closely united with us. Was there ever 
a stronger proof of a most ardent love? How is 
it Lord? Hast Thou forgotten the bad treatment 
Thou didst receive among us? or hast Thou not 
foreseen that, to which the excess of Thy love for us 
exposes Thee? The heart of a chaste and fervent 
person, is an agreeable dwelling for Thee, but how 
many such wilt . Thou find? Canst thou endure the 
coldness of the number of slothful Christians that 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



211 



receive Thee ? their contempt, their want of faith, and 
ahove all, the frightful corruption of their hearts ? 
These are great obstacles, especially for a Heart that 
cannot endure anything denied : but the strength of 
His love overcomes everything. Conceive, if possible, 
the hatred God bears to sin : it is infinite : and yet, in 
a certain manner, it is less than the desire He has 
of coming to us, for He prefers to give Himself up, so 
to speak, to the sacrilegious embraces of the most 
infamous sinners, rather than renounce the delight He 
feels, in being closely united with those who love Him. 
See to what an excess our Saviour loves us in this 
adorable mystery. That a God should deign to be 
Himself our reward. Ego ero merces tua. (Gen. xv. 1.) 
What a wonder ! But that Jesus Christ should be 
Himself our food : Caro mea vere est cibus, et Sanguis 
mens vere est potus. (Joan vi. 57.) This is a miracle of 
love that surpasses our comprehension : it is a liberality 
in which, so to speak, Jesus Christ has exhausted Him- 
self. These are the effects of the tenderness and of the 
immense love of our Blessed Saviour. 

Reflections. 

1. We believe this miracle : and we are insensible to 
this excess of love. 

2. It is surprising that our Lord can love men 
to this extent : but it is most extraordinary that men 
should not love this Divine Saviour, and that no 
motive, no benefit, no excess of love, can inspire us 
with the least feeling of gratitude ! 

3. Ungrateful man ! Insensible man ! What do you 
see in Him, that keeps you at a distance ? Has He 
not done enough to merit our love ? Alas ! He has 
done more than we should have dared to wish for, 
more than we can believe, more in a certain way than 
was becoming His Infinite Majesty, and shall we still 
remain in doubt, whether we will correspond with so 

p2 



Digitized by Google 



212 



MEDITATIONS. 



great generosity, or whether we shall continue to 
despise it ? 

4. A mark of affection, a service rendered, gains the 
hearts of men : Jesus Christ alone, who, after exhaust- 
ing Himself in this mystery of love, after giving Himself 
to men, does not gain their hearts. 

5. All agree that Jesus Christ loves us infinitely, 
that He is infinitely worthy of love, that He has, besides, 
done all that can be imagined to make Himself loved 
by men. Yet very few love Jesus Christ in reality. 

6. Whence is it that He desires so eagerly to come 
to us, and that we must be constrained to go to Him ? 
Because He loves us passionately, and we do not love 
Him at all. 

7. Whence is it, that we depart from Communion 
quite frozen, though we have been nourished with the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ, which is all fire, all love ? 
Because we approach with a heart full of creatures, 
with a closed heart, impenetrable to the darts of His 
love. Because His Heart indeed enters into ours, but 
ours does not enter into His, because we have a sort of 
dislike to enter therein. 

8. We prefer to give up Communion rather than our 
vices. We should be obliged to be more circumspect, 
to love Jesus Christ more, to lead a more regular life, 
if we received oftener this Bread of Angels. The love 
of Jesus Christ is inconvenient to us: we prefer to 
abstain longer from this Bread of Life, and even to 
condemn frequent Communion, because our heart feels 
an excessive disgust for the Body and even for the 
Heart of Jesus Christ. 

9. I desire with ardour, with eagerness, might 
Jesus Christ now say to us, to unite Myself closely to 
you, Desiderio desideravi; et qxwmodo coarctor ! And 
how is it, that nothing is neglected to render these 
desires inefficacious which so well merit universal gra- 
titude ? et quomodo coarctor ! 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



213 



10. Jesus Christ desires to come to us frequently* 
well knowing that this is the only means, of rendering 
us daily less unworthy of it : and there are Christians, 
who under the pretext that they are not worthy, render 
themselves daily more unworthy, by withdrawing from 
Jesus Christ. 

11. If this were a true sentiment of humility, they 
would most certainly possess the virtue that render us 
most worthy : but it is only disgust for the Body of 
Jesus Christ that keeps them at a distance, and even 
makes them blame those who approach more frequently. 

12. The apparent humility of St. Peter, which led % 
him to refuse to allow Jesus Christ to wash his feet, 
was so strongly condemned, that he would have been 
irremediably lost, if he had not changed his conduct : 
Nisi lavero tibi pedes, non habebis partem mecum in 
aternum. (Joan xiii.) How many, through a pretended 
respect, through false modesty, keep away from life, 
and are lost without remedy, by abstaining from holy 
Communion. 

13. The Gentiles and the barbarous nations of the 
East cried out, on only hearing of this mystery : What 
a good God is the God of the Christians ! What a 
benefactor! He is most worthy of love! but, what 
would they have thought, had they been told that 
this loving God was scarcely loved at all by Christians, 
that this exquisite food had no attraction for them, and 
that on the contrary, they had a disgust for it, and 
that they made use of the humble and obscure state to 
which the excess of His love has reduced Him, to 
commit the greatest sacrileges and the most execrable 
profanations. 

14. What must be the sentiments of the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus, the source of all purity, when He is, 
as it were, buried in a heart full of filth, in a heart 
which breathes nothing but hatred, revenge, and im- 
precations against the Saviour Whom it receives ? But 



Digitized by Google 



214 



MEDITATIONS. 



what ought to be ours, knowing with what malice this 
innocent Lamb is treated, Who opens not His mouth 
amidst so many insults and outrages, Who allows Him- 
self to be led to the Altar, Who allows Himself to be 
sacrificed for our salvation ? 

15. Will such excessive goodness, so great meekness, 
never, have power to touch us ? It softened the heart 
of His judge ; it changed into respect and love the 
insolence and rage of His executioners ; it has softened 
the hardness of the hearts, of the most barbarous 
people : shall there be no hearts but ours, that it cannot 
move? . 

16. Every one shudders with horror at the mere 
recital of the treason of Judas, or of the rage of the 
Jews ; we are daily witnesses, and perhaps accomplices* 
in the sacrileges and outrages, that are offered to our 
loving Jesus, in this adorable mystery, and we are not 
touched by them. 

17. In conspectu tuo sunt omnes qui tribidant me: 
Thou hast before Thine eyes those who so ill-treat Ma 
in this sacrament of love, says He to us by the mouth 
of His Prophet ; thou art a witness of their irreverence : 
Improperium expectavit cor meum: My Heart exposed 
to so many indignities, bears them with patience ; et 
sustinui qui simul contristaretw, I thought there would 
be some one at least to take part in My griefs ; et non 
fuit, I have waited until now, and no one presents 
himself; qui consolaretur : I expected that some one 
Would try to repair by his love, his adorations, and 
his homage, the indignities with which My Heart is 
afflicted, and the contempt that is shown for My love, 
et non inveni, and I have not found any one. 

No, no, Lord : it shall never be true that Thou art 
thus abandoned ; I will put an end to these just com- 
plaints. Oh my loving Saviour, is this the way in 
which we correspond with Thy love ? Why hast Thou 
loved us so much ? But rather, why do we love Thee 



Digitized by Google 



.MEDITATIONS. 



215 



so little ? why do we not love Thee at all ? I have not 
been satisfied with insensibility to the love and tender 
sentiments of Thy Heart ; with insensibility to the out- 
rages that have been committed against Thee. I have 
been myself of the number of those who have thus in- 
sulted Thee. My loving Saviour, Whose Heart is 
always burning with love for me, always open to re- 
ceive me, always ready to show me mercy, pardon me 
my former forgetfulness of Thee, pardon me my tepidity, 
my want of faith, ray irreverence, and receive the 
act of reparation that I here make Thee, prostrate 
before Thee. Thou thinkest of me continually in this 
august Sacrament, Thou lovest me continually, Thou 
hast only sentiments of tenderness for me ; and shall I 
forget Thee, 0 Lord ? and shall I feel only indifference 
for Thee ? and shall I not love Thee, 0 my God ? Take 
me out of life, if I am to continue to love Thee so little. 
Let my heart be annihilated, if it is to be in future in- 
sensible to the greatest of all benefits : that is, towards 
Thee, 0 my God, Who, in giving Thyself to us, hast 
given us the most precious present, and the most signal 
favour Thou couldst bestow. 

Audi Israel quid nunc requirit Dominus, aut quid 
petit a te : hear, oh Christian, what the Lord asks of 
thee ; nisi ut diligas eum in toto corde tuo : He asks 
thee to love Him ; He only asks thy heart. What I 
can it be that I oblige Thee to beg for my heart, after 
Thou hast given me Thine? that I should make Thee ask 
for this heart, and even refuse it, though I daily give it 
lavishly to creatures ? Ah my loving Jesus, if I offer 
it now, wilt Thou deign to accept it ? Cor contritum et 
humiliatum, Deus non despicies. This heart is con- 
trite, it is humble ; it cannot fail to please Thee, 0 
Lord. Receive then this heart, which I offer with all 
the movements of which it is capable, to honour Thee 
and love Thee, all the rest of my life. The greater 
number of the years of my life are past and gone, and 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



are lost, because I did not love Thee, but the happiest 
are left, because I will love Thee in future : DUigam 
Te sacratissimum Cor Salvatoris mei Jesu, pro me vul~ 
neratum : I will love Thee, oh adorable Heart of my 
beloved Jesus ; I will love Thee, oh Sacred Heart, 
wounded in the Eucharist by the love of me. Diligam 
Te. I will honour Thee during the rest of my life ; 
Thou shalt be my repose, my constant abode, and my 
place of refuge : Hcec requies mea> hie habitabo. Let 
no one seek me elsewhere ; I will in future be found no 
more but in the Heart of my loving Jesus : Hie fidenter 
habito, hie me jucunde refieior, hie quiesco maviter, Jnc 
pascor delectabUiter. This Sacred Heart is the place 
of my abode ; this Heart shall be my food. In It I 
will rest from all my labours, burning with the same 
fire of love with which It burns, with It and in it I 
will love Him. 

The Meditation may be concluded with the following 
Prayer : — 

Anima Christi sanctifica me. 
Cor Christi accende me. 
Sanguis Christi inebria me. 
Corpus Christi salva me. 
Aqua lateris Christi lava me. 
Passio Christi comforta me. 
0 bone Jesu exaudi me. 
Intra tua vulnera absconde me. 
Ne permittas me separari a te. 
Ab hoste maligno defende me ; 
In hora mortis mece voca me, 
Et jube me venire ad te : 
Ut cum Sanctis tuis laudem te 
In saecula sfeculorum. Amen. 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



21* 



Meditation fob the Fibst Fbidat in each 
Month. 

On the sentiments of the Heart of Jesus Christ at the sight 
of the ingratitude of men, and of the outrages, to which 
His excessive love for these very men, has exposed Him. 

We may represent to ourselves the pitiable state to 
which tide Son of God was reduced in the garden of 
Olives, when He allowed His imagination to bring 
before Him, with the greatest liveliness possible, and 
with all the circumstances that added to His affliction, 
the greatness of His torments and the indignity of the 
insults He would have to endure, unto the end of ages, 
from three kinds of persons : from the Jews who would 
not acknowledge Him ; from heretics who, though they 
would acknowledge Him, would not believe in His 
benefits ; and from the faithful themselves, who, be- 
lieving in Him, would repay Him only with ingratitude- 
At this sight He began to fear, as the Gospel tells us, 
to be sad and sorrowful, and at last He fell into a sort 
of agony, receiving no consolation from any one, not 
even from His faithful disciples, to whom He com- 
plained of it, when He said to them : " My soul is 
sorrowful unto death, and you forsake me, when you 
see me reduced to so miserable a state." Let us 
imagine that Jesus Christ is making this complaint 
to us. 

Fibst Point.— The sentiments of the Heart of Jesus Christ at 
the sight of the torments He would have to endure, from the 
cruelty of the Jews. 

Consider what were the sentiments of Jesus Christ, 
when He represented to Himself distinctly on one hand, 
the singular favours He had bestowed on this people, 
and on the other, the cruelties and the outrages, that He 
would have to endure from this very nation, after so 



Digitized by Google 



218 



MEDITATION 



many benefits. All the graces that had preceded His 
coming, had been granted only in consideration of the 
merits of Jesus Christ. For that nation chiefly, the 
Son of God had become man. From it, in preference 
to any other, He had selected His relations and His 
friends, He had therein worked His miracles, and 
preached His doctrine, and for so many benefits He 
receives no return but harshness, persecution, and 
insults. Shelter is refused Him when He is about to 
be born into the world : almost as soon as He is born, 
He is obliged to seek refuge among strangers. How 
unworthily was He treated during His whole life ? but 
what did He not suffer at His death ? He was taken 
like a thief, dragged like a culprit along those very 
streets through which, a few days before, He had been 
led in triumph as the Messiah. He was struck on the 
face, as an insolent man, in the house of Caiphas ; He 
was spit upon as a blasphemer ; He was treated with 
contempt and as a mock king; He was made for a 
whole night the butt of insolent soldiers, who load 
Him with insults ; He was treated by Herod as an 
idiot and a fool; He was condemned to be scourged 
like a miserable slave — a criminal was preferred before 
Him, as if He were the more wicked ; lastly, He was 
condemned to the most ignominious of deaths, and 
nailed to a cross, on which He expires in the sight of a 
great number of persons, the greater part of whom had 
been witnesses of His miracles, and in whose favour 
He had worked them, without one person being found 
in all this number of people to take His part, or even 
to compassionate Him. They pass even from insensi- 
bility to contempt, and from contempt to horror and 
execration. But they are perhaps deceived; No, they 
are not deceived. They knqw very well how blameless 
His life has been, how holy and exemplary, miraculous, 
and filled with benefits and prodigies ; and for this they 
persecute Him. 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



319 



All this presented itself clearly and distinctly to 
Jesus Christ. He knew well the dignity of His person* 
the greatness of His benefits, the disinterestedness of 
His love, the baseness, the rage, and the malice of 
those who treated Him so cruelly. 

A noble soul, when it is powerfully possessed by love* 
and hopes by suffering to make known its passion, is 
capable of offering itself spontaneously to torments ; 
but the more generosity and tenderness it has, the 
more pain it feels in bearing injustice and ingratitude : 
especially when it sees itself sacrificed to the envy of 
its enemies, and betrayed by those, from whom it had 
reason to expect help in its misfortunes, and when it 
sees that all that it suffers, is not capable of inspiring 
them with the smallest sentiment of compassion. 

No one ever represented to himself events, with all 
their circumstances, more strongly or more distinctly 
than Jesus Christ. No one had ever a more generous 
heart, and consequently one more sensible to ingrati- 
tude. Oh God ! with what a torrent of bitterness was 
this Sacred Heart then inundated, in representing to 
Himself what He had done for this people, and what 
this people would do against Him. Let us judge, who 
feel so deeply the least contempt, especially when it 
comes from those who are under some obligation to us* 
what must have been the feelings of Jesus Christ at 
such a spectacle. 

. The grief by which His Heart was oppressed, must 
have been very cruel, since it was the only torment of 
His Passion, of which Jesus Christ made any complaint* 
My soul is sorrowful unto death, He said to His 
disciples, and you forsake Me, when you see Me ret 
duced to so pitiable a state : Attendite est videte, si est 
dehr, sicui dolor mens ! Consider and see if there is 
a sorrow equal to mine. Oh ingratitude ! oh cruelty ! 
and in so terrible an oppression, in such mortal sad? 
ness, no consolation, Generatio prava, atque perversa^ 



Digitized by Google 



320 



MEDITATIONS. 



haccine reddis Domino popule stulte et insipiens ? (Deut« 
xxxii.) Ungrateful men! Insensible Christians! Is 
this your gratitude for your Saviour, and for your 
God? 

No, no, Lord ; it shall never be true that Thou art 
so universally abandoned ; it shall never be true that 
Thou canst not find any one to participate in Thy 
sorrow. I ask of Thee, oh Lord, that Thou wouldst 
pour, from Thy Heart into mine, one drop of that torrent 
of bitterness with which Thine was inundated, at the 
sight of so much ingratitude and so many insults, that, 
if I am not happy enough, to be able to blot out my sins, 
by the shedding of all my blood, I may be at least 
afflicted enough, to wash them away continually by 
my tears. 

Second Point.— The sentiments of the Heart of Jesus Christ 
at the sight of the outrages, which He should have to endure 
from the malice of heretics. 

Consider that the second object of the fear, and of 
the terrible sadness, in which the Heart of the Son of 
God was plunged, was the number of the outrages and 
injuries, that He would have to endure, from the malice 
of heretics, to the end of ages, and which His imagi- 
nation represented to Him, with all the circumstances 
that added to His affliction, without diminishing 
them or concealing any of them from Him. Nothing 
is more painful to a generous heart than ingratitude, 
especially when accompanied by great contempt. But 
the most enormous of all ingratitude is that, by 
which man not only does not correspond with the 
benefits he has received, but even denies that he has 
ever received such benefits, in order to be at liberty to 
ill-use his benefactor, without being considered un- 
grateful. Jesus Christ knew distinctly, at that time, 
that there would be great numbers of Christians, 
who would renew, in His Sacred Body in the 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS, 



821 



Adorable Eucharist, all the outrages of which the 
malice of demons could be capable. That, to be at 
liberty to exercise upon Him all their fury and rage, 
they would carry their malice so far, as to deny in the 
Adorable Eucharist, the real presence of the Body of 
Jesus Christ. 

Who would have believed that men could be capable 
of such excessive malice, and who can imagine any- 
thing more afflicting, than to see, that the most wonderr 
ful mark of the greatest love, is made use of only to heap 
injuries on Him, Who has so much loved us ? Hiss 
imagination represented clearly to Jesus Christ, all that 
has happened in these latter ages. He saw His temples 
profaned, His Altars demolished, His Priests murdered, 
and His Adorable Body thrown to the ground, trampled 
under foot, and made the object of the scoffs and in- 
solence of the greatest sinners, the horror and the 
execration of impious men. 

What must have been the sentiments of this tender 
and generous Heart ? Was it necessary, oh Lord, to 
work so great a miracle, to furnish men with a means 
of treating Thee so unworthily ? Was it necessary, 
through an excess of love, to remain with them unto 
the end of ages, to be until the end of ages, the object 
of their contempt and of their rage ? Is not such a 
picture, enough to wither a heart with grief and sad- 
ness ? Art Thou then, O King of glory, He Whom I 
see in so many places covered with insult and ignominy ? 
Art Thou the God of Majesty before Whom the Sera- 
phim bow down with respect, Whom I see so insolently 
treated by the wretched worms of the earth ? Art Thou 
an object of horror and execration to Thy creatures, to 
Thy slaves, to Thy own children, and all this because 
Thou hast loved them too much ? 

Who could ever have imagined, that there would be 
in man, an excess of malice, equivalent to the excess 
of Thy goodness, an excess of ingratitude, correspond- 



Digitized by Google 



322 



MEDITATIONS. 



ing so to speak with the excess of love with which Thou 
hast loved us ? 

But, my beloved Saviour, should not I be guilty of 
worse ingratitude if, in considering Thy sentiments at 
the sight of such cruel ingratitude, I were myself 
insensible to Thy grief? 

Here is the place, oh Lord, where I see Thee, as 
Thy Prophet has described Thee : the last of men, the 
man of sorrows (Isa. liii. 8). Heretics have treated 
Thee as the last and most contemptible of men, and 
have fulfilled the Prophecy which said, that Thou 
shouldst be satiated with insults : satwrabitur oppro- 
briis (Thren. iii. 80). But oh my God, will these here- 
tics, these inhuman children, these impious men never 
be satisfied with treating Thee so insolently, with offer- 
ing Thee such outrages ? And shall I never be touched 
by seeing Thee so Hi-treated? This sad picture, this 
sight made Thee even sweat blood. I beg of Thee 
that it may move me to tears, and that if my heart 
cannot feel that grief which oppressed Thine, the con- 
fusion I feel at being so insensible to Thy sufferings 
may supply in some degree for my insensibility. 

Third Point. — The sentiments of the Heart of Jesus Christ 
at the sight of the ingratitude of the greater number of the 
faithful. 

Consider that it was no less an object of affliction 
and sadness for Jesus Christ, to see the ingratitude of 
the greater number of the faithful themselves, who 
would show only coldness, indifference, and forgetful- 
ness towards this most loving Saviour. He saw the 
little esteem, not to say contempt, that would be felt 
for the greatest proof of the most ardent love. He saw 
that whatever He might do to be loved by the faithful, 
and to be continually with them by instituting the 
adorable Eucharist, neither this excess of love, nor His 
benefits, nor even His presence would have power to 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



323 



oblige them to love Him, nor to prevent them from for- 
getting Him. He represented to Himself those 
Churches wherein He dwells for the greater part of 
the time, without adorers. He foresaw the want of 
respect and reverence with which persons would behave 
in His presence. He saw clearly, how many would 
be found, who, losing entire hours in vain conversa- 
tion, or useless visits, or spending the greater part of 
the day in idleness, would never find time, or rather 
would never be in the humour, to spend a quarter of 
an hour at the foot of His Altars. Lastly, £ow many 
who would not be induced to visit Him at all, and who 
would scarcely go, once in eight days, to adore Him 
with coldness. He knew how many others would 
visit Him without devotion, and how much irreverence 
and formality there would be in these visits ; and lastly 
how few would visit Him with eagerness. This loving 
Saviour knew distinctly, that the greater number would 
trouble themselves no more about Him, than if He were 
not upon earth, or as if when on earth, He were not 
the same as in Heaven. 

When He foresaw that Jews, Gentiles, and heretics 
would feel nothing for Him but hardness and contempt, 
this bad treatment caused Him extreme pain; but, 
after all, these are His declared enemies : and what do 
we expect from an enemy ? But, what pained Him most 
was, that those who acknowledge His benefits, that the 
little flock which professes fidelity towards Him, thatHis 
own children should be insensible to His benefits, and 
should not be touched at the sight of the grief caused 
Him by these insults, nay should also despise Him by 
their irreverences and sacrileges. If Gentiles, Turks, 
and men who are professedly wicked, had vomited forth 
abuse against Me, I would have borne it without com- 
plaining, might the loving Saviour say : Si immicus 
maledixisset mihi, sustinuissem utique. (Ps. liv. 3). But 



Digitized by Google 



224 



MEDITATIONS. 



that Christians, Catholics, of whom I have been not only 
the Redeemer, but am still the daily food ; that my own 
children should feel nothing for me but ^difference, that 
they should even treat me with contempt ! Tu veto 
homo unanimis qui simul mecum dulces capiebas cibos ! 
(Ibid.) 

At this sight, at this thought, what were the senti- 
ments of the Heart of Jesus Christ ? that is of the most 
tender and generous Heart that ever existed ; of a Heart 
that loves the hearts of men passionately, and Who meets 
in the hearts of these very men with nothing but cold- 
ness, hardness, and contempt. Super omnes inimicos 
tneos, He says by the mouth of His Prophet (Ps. xxx. 
12), f actus sum opprobrium: I have been made the 
sport and the laughing-stock of My enemies. At 
least amidst the insults that I have received, I 
should have met with a great number of servants and 
devoted friends, but it is quite the contrary : Qui vide- 
bant me foras fugerunt a me. (Ibid.) Scarcely did I 
disguise Myself under the feeble forms of bread, to 
which the excess of My love has reduced Me for the 
sake of the pleasure of being continually with men, than 
they removed further from Me, they forsook Me, they 
forgot Me as One Who had no place in their heart ; 
Oblivioni datus sum tanquam mortuus a corde. 

But did our loving Saviour, in representing all 
this to Himself, exaggerate the cause of His grief 
and sadness ? Did this frightful picture deceive 
Him, which placed before Him so many insults, and 
outrages, and so extraordinary an insensibility in the 
hearts of so many Christians? Is it then true that 
Jesus Christ has been treated thus ? Is it true that 
His people have been insensible to this ill-treatment ? 
Alas ! It is enough for me to reflect on my own sen- 
timents, and am not I a prodigy of insensibility, if in 
considering all this, I am still unmoved ? Ah Lord ! 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 225 

can I think of all this, and at the same time reflect, that 
it is a God who suffered this fearful sadness, in which 
His Heart was plunged at the sight of so much insult 
and dishonour, that it is a God who willingly accepted 
and hore this opprobrium and this disgrace for me, 
and not die of grief and love ? If a man or a slave,' 
had suffered the hundredth part of what Jesus Christ 
has endured, and still bears daily on our Altars, for 
the love of us, we could not refuse to love Him, to be 
grateful to Him, to give Him at least marks of com- 
passion, and to say sometimes: That poor unhappy man 
really loved me, and he would not have borne so much, 
if he had not loved me so dearly." Shall it be only the 
proofs of the love of Jesus Christ, still daily forgotten 
and despised in the Adorable Eucharist, ill-treated for 
the love of us, to which we shall be insensible, and 
what is more, which we shall repay t>nly by ingratitude 
and coldness ? Can it be that the heart of man is 
capable of such an excess of hardness and insensi- 
bility ? Alas ! Lord, it is but too capable of it, and it 
will soon give proof of it, if that love which has obliged 
Thee to expose Thyself to such indignities and out- 
rages for it, does not force Thee to soften its hardness, 
and warm its coldness, to make it feel its injuries to Thee, 
and render it capable of Thy love. For of what use 
would be all the miracles Thou hast wrought, and all 
the torments Thou has endured, but to harden and 
make me more guilty, if I were not touched by them, 
if I did not feel grateful, and if I did not love Thee 
more in consequence ? As I hope, oh Lord, that Thou 
wilt not refuse me Thy grace, I make at this moment 
a strong resolution, to give Thee in future undoubted 
proofs of my love, and of my just gratitude. I have 
been until now, insensible to Thy benefits, insensible 
to Thy sufferings, indifferent towards Thee, though I 
know that Thou art continually with us. I have great 
reason, my loving Saviour, to feel diffidence in my 

Q 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



promises and resolutions, having been hitherto, so in- 
constant and unfaithful in Thy service ; but it seems 
to me, that Thy mercy now inspires me with greater 
courage, and that I shall be in future more constant 
and faithful, in the promise I make Thee, of showing, by 
my respect in Thy presence, by my frequent visits, and 
by my assiduity in attending upon Thee, the sincere 
devotion I feel to thy Sacred Heart, and the ardent 
desire I entertain, of repairing as far as possible, during 
the rest of my days, by my respect, and every kind of 
homage, all the contempt and the outrages, Thou hast 
endured in the adorable Eucharist, as also the forget- 
fulness and the extraordinary indifference that are 
shown towards Thy adorable Person in the Blessed 
Sacrament : DUigam te Domine irirtus mea, Dominus 
firmamentum meum, est refugium meum. (Ps. xvii. I.) 



Different Subjects of Meditation for the 
Fridays in each Month. 

Besides the Meditation assigned for the first Friday 
in each month, which is a day more specially con- 
secrated to the honour of the Sacred Heart of Jesus, 
I have thought it well to assign here various subjects 
of Meditation for the Fridays in the year, which are 
also days destined, to honour this Sacred Heart in 
a particular manner. The subject of these Medita- 
tions is taken, from those parts of the Gospel, which 
relate to the sadness Jesus Christ has felt, during the 
time of His mortal life, and in which He has testified 
more feelingly, the excessive affliction with which His 
Heart was pierced. Let us afterwards consider the 
sentiments of this afflicted Heart, as applicable to 
those which He has reason to experience, on account of 
the coldness, the contempt, and the outrages, that He 
daily receives in the adorable Eucharist, where alas, 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS* 227 

wicked Christians, too often, renew the treatment, He 
has received from the Jews. I have endeavoured as 
far as possible, that these subjects should be in ac- 
cordance, with the Gospels of the Sundays in the year, 
I will give rather more at length, the two points of 
the first of these Meditations, but for fear of adding too 
much to the size of this book, will give only the subjects 
of the others, making upon each, a few reflections, in 
conformity with the intention we should propose to 
ourselves, in these Meditations. 

JANUARY. 

Meditation for the Second Fbidat in Januaby. 

Si opera non fecissem in eis, qua nemo alius fecit, pec- 
catum non haberent ; nunc autem et viderunt, et oderunt 
me et Patrem. (Jom xv. 24.) 

If I had not wrought amongst them works that no 
other has ever done, they would not have sinned, 
but now they have seen them, and they have hated 
Me and my Father. 

First Point. 

Consider, that if the Jews had not been visibly con- 
vinced, by the testimony of the Prophets, as they ought 
to have been, that Jesus Christ was the Messiah, the 
wonders alone which he wrought, ought to have gained 
Him the veneration of all, and his most amiable virtues, 
His indefatigable zeal for their salvation, His excessive 
meekness, and above all, the wonderful benefits He 
bestowed on this people, in favour of whom, all these 
prodigies were wrought, ought to have gained for Him, 
the hearts of all who knew Him. 

All these things however have a quite contrary 
effect. Jesus Christ is persecuted, hated, and treated 
worse than the greatest criminal in the world. Have 

Q 2 



Digitized by Google 



228 MEDITATIONS. 

His benefits and His miracles been forgotten? No, 
certainly. Men remember them and speak of them : 
but they almost impute to Him as a crime these benefits 
and these miracles, and He is only treated so ill by the 
Jews, because He has loved them too much, and has 
been too liberal towards them. Conceive, if possible; 
what must have been the sentiments of Jesus Christ ; 
what was the affliction of His Heart, at the sight of 
such enormous ingratitude. 

Second Point. 

But consider, what must His thoughts be now, 
seeing Himself daily so unworthily treated in the 
adorable Eucharist by Christians themselves, though 
He only instituted the adorable Eucharist, to satisfy 
His excessive love, for these very Christians. If Jesus 
Christ had not wrought this miracle, if Jesus Christ 
had not loved us to this excess, should we have any 
reason for not loving Him ? Ungrateful Christians, 
what do you think of it? Has this loving Saviour 
done enough to deserve your love ? and if His excessive 
love has moved Him, so to speak, to do too much, 
ought this excess of love«to induce us not to love Him, 
and to despise Him? This is however what follows 
from the institution of this adorable mystery. He 
shall be satiated with insults, said the Prophet. He 
shall be the last and the most despised of men ; and is 
not this prophecy daily verified towards Jesus Christ, 
since we have witnessed the miracle He has wrought in 
our favour, by the institution of the most Blessed 
Sacrament ? The ingratitude and impiety of the Jews 
excite in us a just indignation against that wicked 
nation; we see however these impieties and this in- 
gratitude continually renewed, in the insults, to which 
we know that love exposes Jesus Christ, in the Adorable 
Eucharist, and shall we never be touched by them ? 

I have been hitherto insensible, oh Lord, I have been 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



229 



ungrateful: I have even done what would seem im- 
possible, since, by an unheard of prodigy, and which 
has no example, except in regard of God, not only 
have I corresponded with Thy benefits only by out- 
rages, but I have also, if I dare say it, almost made 
the greatness of my treachery, and of my ingratitude 
towards Thee, equal the greatness of Thy goodness 
and mercy for me. Continue oh Lord, this mercy, 
notwithstanding all my infidelities, but all that I ask 
now, is, either to die of grief, or to live in a continual 
repentance, for having so little loved a God Who has 
loved me to excess, and Who continually gives me, in 
the Eucharist, the most manifest proof of the greatest 
love that ever existed. 

I will love Thee in future, oh my Saviour ; I will 
begin from this moment, to render Thee my homage in 
the most Blessed Sacrament, with assiduity and fervour. 
The modesty and respect with which I will behave 
in future in Thy presence, my devotion to Thy Sacred 
Heart, and my ardent desire, of repairing as far as 
possible, by the help of Thy grace, all the outrages 
I have been guilty of, and those which Thou daily 
receivest in the Adorable Eucharist, shall be a con- 
vincing proof that I have begun in earnest to love 
Thee ; grant that I may never cease to do so. Amen. 

Meditation for the Third Friday in January. 

Et scandalizabantur in eo ; Jesus autem dixit eis : Non 
est Propheta sine honore nisi inpatria sua et domo sua. 
(Matt. xiii. 57 et 58.) 

They were scandalized in His regard. But Jesus said 
to them : A Prophet is not without honour, save in 
his own country, and in his own house, and He wrought 
not many miracles there, because of their unbelief. 

In what could Jesus Christ be a subject of scandal, 



Digitized by Google 



230 



MEDITATIONS. 



if not in concealing Himself too much, and being too 
cautious and circumspect ? The love which He bears 
us, is excessive and boundless ; but this love, which 
ought to gain Him the hearts of all men, procures Him 
nothing but contempt. Those, amongst whom He had 
dwelt longest, are they who know Him the least, and 
who render themselves most unworthy of His graces ; 
and, as He finds faithful servants only among strangers, 
it is only amongst them, that He works His greatest 
miracles, and bestows His benefits most liberally. 

It is extraordinary, that a Prophet should be without 
honour, only in his own country, and his own house, but 
it is much more extraordinary that Jesus Christ should 
receive, in His own house, so many insults, that He 
should be so little known to those, among whom He 
continually dwells, and so little loved, by those, even, to 
whom He is known. It is extraordinary, that when He 
opens to us, all His treasures in the Blessed Sacrament, 
and gives Himself to us, we feel so little the effects of 
His presence; and that those who approach Him the 
nearest, and the most frequently, are not always the most 
holy, and do not constantly love Him more and more I 
It is extraordinary^ that Jesus Christ, Who is continually 
amongst us, works so few miracles ; that, on the con- 
trary, He should be to many a subject of scandal ; but 
will it not be yet more unaccountable, if, making these 
reflections to-day myself, I do not love Jesus Christ 
more, I remain insensible