 
throw discredit by their defects upon the virtue which 
is attributed to them, and thus make their own example 
serve as a kind of pretext to the licentious. Let it not 
be said, that this perfect love of Jesus Christ, that true 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER V. 



163 



piety as here described, has no existence but in idea ; 
or that if it really exists in the world, a life regulated 
by such maxims must be necessarily very singular, and 
that any one who lives in this manner must be very 
unhappy. The life and the spirit of all the Saints is 
itself the model from which this description has been 
taken. There is not one who, by leading a life in ac- 
cordance with this idea, has not enjoyed a peace and 
joy beyond all conception. If many among such as 
seem most circumspect cannot be recognized from this 
description, it is because many of those who profess 
piety have not courage to do all that is necessary to 
attain this height of perfection. They make some 
efforts. They even make some progress in the path of 
piety. B ut they generally stop half way, and many who 
seem to have hardly a step to make, deprive themselves 
of all the advantages of a life of perfection, from not 
having courage to take this step. 

But most persons, says St. Francis of Sales, form to 
themselves a false idea of devotion. You find few who 
do not represent it to themselves in accordance with 
their humour, their natural disposition, and their pas- 
sions. A person subject to melancholy makes solid 
virtue consist in leading a secluded life, and cannot 
imagine that any one can be always cheerful, and at the 
same time truly devout. Others, looking only at the 
exterior, in the spiritual life, make it consist in exterior 
penances, in hairshirts, fasting, watching, and similar 
macerations of the body. Many imagine they have 
attained consummate virtue when they have acquired 
the habit of reciting long vocal prayers, of hearing 
many Masses, of assisting at the whole divine office, of 
remaining a long time in the Church, or of frequently 
communicating. Some, even among those who serve 
God in religion, think that to be perfect (La Colomb. 
B. sp. ch. 1) it suffices to be assiduous in the choir, to 
love retirement and silence, to be faithful in observing 

m 2 



Digitized by Google 



164 



THIRD PABT. 



religious discipline. Thus, some place perfection in 
one exercise, and some in another. But it is certain 
that they all deceive themselves. For, as exterior 
works are only either dispositions for becoming per- 
fectly holy, or the fruits of perfect sanctity, it cannot 
be said that Christian perfection or the perfect love of 
God consists solely in works of this kind. They may 
be excellent fruits of consummate virtue in truly holy 
persons. But they may be very injurious to those who 
become so attached to them, as to neglect to watch over 
the motions of their hearts, to occupy themselves with 
true interior mortification, and to conform their will, in 
all things, to that of God. 

The true love of God — in other words, true devotion, 
and the spiritual life — properly consists, as we have 
seen, in loving God, and hating ourselves; in sub- 
mitting ourselves, not only to Him, but to every crea- 
ture for the love of Him ; in entirely renouncing our 
own will to follow His ; in mortifying pride and self- 
love ; and, above all, in doing all this solely for the 
glory of His name, without any other design but to 
please Him ; for the sole reason that He desires and 
merits to be loved and served by His creatures. This 
is what is contained in the law of love, which the Holy 
Spirit has engraved in the hearts of the just It is in 
this manner that we are to practise that abnegation of 
ourselves so much recommended by our Blessed Saviour 
in the Gospel. It is this that makes His yoke so sweet, 
and His burden so light. 

Not every one that saith to me, Lord, Lord, says the 
Son of God, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but 
lie that doth the will of my Father Who is in heaven. 
Many, continues our divine Master, will say to me in 
that day, Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in Thy 
Name ? and cast out devils in Thy Name ? and done 
many miracles in Thy Name ? And He will say to them 
in a loud voice : " I never knew you ; depart from me.'* 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER V. 



165 



This is a good but severe lesson for those who labour 
much, and even with success, for the salvation of souls, 
should they, after guiding others to sublime perfection, 
be so unhappy as to go on creeping all their lives, and 
to die in the great imperfections in which they have lived. 

It would be well if we were thoroughly convinced 
that the love of Jesus Christ, true devotion, Christian 
virtue, and solid piety properly consist in sincere 
humility, universal and constant mortification, and 
perfect conformity of our will to the will of God. If 
any one of these three virtues be wanting, all the rest 
is mere deceit and affectation. There is no devotion. 
There can be no virtue. 

This is the opinion of the Apostle, and of all the 
masters of the spiritual life. Or rather, it is the 
opinion of all true Christians, for it is the sentiment 
of Christ Himself. It must consequently be the sen- 
timent of all who have the true spirit of Jesus Christ. 
In our designs and undertakings, says a great servant 
of God, it is better to propose to ourselves, to do the 
will of God, than to procure the glory of God. For, by 
doing God's will, we infallibly procure His glory also. 
But, in proposing to ourselves the glory of God, as the 
motive of our actions, we are sometimes deceived, and 
do our own will under the specious pretext of the glory 
of God. This delusion is not uncommon in those who 
employ themselves in good works and in ministering 
to the salvation of souls. True perfection, which is 
open to no deception, is to fulfil in all things the holy 
will of God. But there are very few souls sufficiently 
enlightened to know the excellence of this perfection, 
as there are also few who experience the happiness 
which results from it. 

God has loved us too much, says a faithful friend of 
Jesus Christ, to allow of our being niggardly towards 
Him. The mere thought of not being wholly His 
should horrify us. Shall I not belong wholly to God, 



Digitized by Google 



166 



THIRD FAST. 



after the mercy He daily shows me ? Shall I refuse 
Him anything, seeing that I have received all from 
Him ? My heart will not allow it. When I think of 
the little we can do for God, even though we devote 
ourselves wholly to His service, I hlush at the thought 
of refusing Him anything. We are not safe in taking 
a middle course. We very soon fall lower and lower. 
None but those who give themselves to God without 
reserve can hope to die with consolation. They alone 
can promise themselves a life of tranquillity and joy. 
We see how completely the life and the sentiments of 
the true servants of God agree with the character we 
have drawn of the true servant of God, and what sweet- 
ness they experience. Those who, from want of true 
devotion, have never tasted these heavenly consolations, 
imagine that it is the same with those who are truly 
devout, and who have a true love for Jesus Christ* 
But they deceive themselves. 

We may judge also how far removed from the true 
love of Jesus Christ, and from real piety, are certain 
persons who adopt its practices exteriorly, and never 
cease talking about it ; persons who are devout through 
whim, impulse, or caprice ; whom an affliction or a 
retreat may keep for two or three days in recollection, 
without, however, making them more holy or less 
imperfect ; persons who refuse nothing to their senses, 
who perform the holiest exercises in a purely natural 
manner, who are continually distracted, f whose heart is 
always open to foreign objects, exposed to the assaults 
of the enemy, agitated by a thousand passions, always 
troubled, and rarely ever without some disturbance; 
persons whose sensitiveness is so excessive, that the 
slightest thing offends them ; full of disguise and subter- 
fuge, never acting but through self-love, never attain- 
ing their end but by manoeuvring and deceit, and 
varying in humour every hour because they only follow 
the different emotions of their passions. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER V. 



167 



We may easily see that such persons have not the 
spirit of Jesus Christ ; that their virtue is only outside ; 
and that as long as they persevere in this unhappy 
state, their devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus will 
he too imperfect to merit for them an entrance into that 
divine Heart, or at least to dwell there long. 

IL Effects of the perfect love of Jesus Christ. 

From what has been already said, it will easily he 
understood, that the ordinary effects of the perfect love 
of Jesus Christ, may be reduced to this ; that it forms 
in us a resemblance to this divine model, as far as is 
possible in this life, by a perfect imitation of His 
admirable virtues; so that our exterior and interior 
life becomes a true copy of His ; and, as He is the 
living image of God the Father, so we also become 
His living images, by copying in ourselves, the features 
of His life, His mysteries, and His virtues. We easily 
imitate what we love much. Our perfect imitation of 
Jesus Christ shows itself in an unalterable meekness, 
in a perfect liberty of spirit, in an entire dependence 
on Jesus Christ in all our actions, and in a great love 
of the Cross. 

Such are the ordinary effects of the true love of our 
Divine Saviour ; and in proportion as our love is more 
ardent and tender, we possess these virtues more per- 
fectly. Meekness is so peculiarly the virtue of Jesus 
Christ, that the Prophets rarely allude to any other, 
when giving the description of Him. Amongst all the 
Saints of the Old Testament, those who have been the 
most perfect figures of Jesus Christ, as Moses and 
David, have excelled in this virtue. Erat enim Moyses 
vir mitisdmm super omnes qui morabantur in terra. 
For Moses was a man exceeding meek above all men 
that dwelt upon earth. (Num. xii. 3.) Memento Domine 
David, et omnis mansuetudinis ejus, 0 Lord, remember 
David and all his meekpess. (P. cxxxi.) It is said of 



Digitized by Google 



168 



THIRD PART. 



the first that he was the meekest of all men then 
living on the earth: and the second seems to have 
preferred meekness to all other virtues. Does not 
Jesus Christ Himself plainly teach us, by His example 
and His words, that meekness, properly speaking, 
forms His character, and that it is not possible to be 
like Him, without having his meekness ? Perfect love 
always seeks resemblance. Now this unalterable meek- 
ness is the virtue which more particularly impresses 
upon us the external and visible features of resem- 
blance to our Blessed Lord, and it is also the ordinary 
effect of His love. 

This lovely virtue contains, it is true, many others. 
For it is impossible to be always good humoured, to 
receive all things with a smiling countenance, to prac- 
tise an unalterable meekness on all occasions, if we 
have not also sincere humility, continual mortification, 
perfect charity, an undisturbed tranquillity of soul, 
superior to all annoyances. For, if one of these virtues 
be wanting, meekness also will fail. That reserve, 
that austere and disagreeable exterior, that stern ex- 
pression which is seen sometimes in persons who pass 
for spiritual, is usually the effect of a natural dispo- 
sition, not yet mortified. It was never the charac- 
teristic of a disciple of Jesus Christ. For our Divine 
Saviour desires that meekness, and perfect humility of 
heart, should be the distinguishing qualities of His 
disciples. We daily find by experience, that we are 
never more meek towards others, than when we feel 
most tender love for Jesus Christ. It was by meekness, 
that the Apostles gained the most obdurate nations. 
Apostolical men will never gain anything for the 
Church, if they do not possess this amiable virtue. 

Liberty of spirit makes our interior conformable to 
that of Jesus Christ, by a perfect forgetfulness of 
ourselves, and perfect resignation to what He ordains, 
so that we behold, in all things, only the will of God, 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER V. 



169 



and are always disposed to fulfil it, without uneasiness, 
and without anxiety. It is a sure sign, that we have 
not much love for Jesus Christ, if we are not in this 
disposition, of perfect resignation to His will. If we 
feel so much pleasure in doing what is agreeable 1 to 
those w» profess to love, is it not evident, that we can- 
not truly love Jesus Christ, without being inclined to 
do all that He desires ? When a person loves Him, he 
does only what is pleasing to Him, and nothing gives 
him pleasure, but what He wills. 

When we have once entirely given up our hearts to 
the love of Jesus Christ, this love no longer admits of 
either our own sentiments, or our own will ; it takes 
from us all our affections, and places us in a holy 
indifference, in which all things are the same to us. 
We desire nothing, and yet will every thing : we care 
not in what the will of God employs us, whether in 
great or little things, pleasant or disagreeable. Every 
kind of event is the fulfilment of our desires, because, 
since we will whatever God allows to happen, nothing 
can happen that does not please us. Those who are 
attached to their employments, to the place of their 
abode, to their conveniences, or to any thing else, can- 
not serve our Lord with liberty of spirit, because they 
are slaves of their own will. This causes them to gain 
little merit, and disturbs the peace of their souls. 
They withdraw themselves from the guidance of the 
Holy Spirit and the ways of grace. They find the 
yoke of the Lord bitter and heavy, and expose them- 
selves to many illusions and dangers. Fervent souls 
should therefore, abandon any occupation whatever 
for the love of Jesus Christ, when He requires it. 
Nothing should seem of consequence to them, nothing 
should influence them, but the love of Jesus. All other 
things should be indifferent to them. We must only be 
careful, that this indifference does not degenerate into 
negligence and sloth. 



Digitized by Google 



170 



THIRD PART. 



All our application and all our delight should be to 
do what God wills, when He wills it, and in the man- 
ner He wills it. Without this, there can be no virtue; 
all is illusion and self-love. This perfect conformity to 
the will of God, and perfect submission to the appoint- 
ments of Divine Providence, which lead us«to wish 
for nothing but what God wills that we should do, 
whether He makes use of us, for distinguished employ- 
ments, or leaves us to lead a life of obscurity, are not 
only the shortest and most secure path, but properly 
speaking, the only one, by which to acquire perfect 
purity of heart, a great love of Jesus Christ, and at 
the same time, great merit. A man who places his 
reliance on God, is immoveable, and cannot be shaken. 
Whatever adverse circumstance may happen, he is 
content, because he has no other will than that of God. 
What a happy state of peace and tranquillity ! But we 
must fight courageously, if we would attain it. 

The third effect of this love, is an entire dependence 
on Jesus Christ in all our actions. This consists in a 
constant remembrance of Jesus Christ, by which we 
keep Him in view, and continually represent Him 
to ourselves, as the model of our actions. To this 
model, we strive to conform ourselves. We do only what 
He wills. We try to do it in the manner in which He 
Himself did it, whilst He was amongst us visibly on 
earth. This sight and example of Jesus Christ re- 
gulate the life of those who love Him, and give to 
them that modesty of manner and odour of sanctity, 
which equally attract and edify all, and inspire venera- 
tion for their persons, and love for their virtue. 
. It cannot be conceived what advantage may be drawn 
from this exercise of the love of Jesus Christ, and from 
looking on Him as the perfect model of our actions. 
By this means, our heart becomes insensibly detached 
from creatures; self-love dies away and becomes ex- 
tinct : defects are corrected, the soul is filled with the 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER Y. 



171 



spirit of Jesus Christ, and great progress is made in 
perfection. 

Esteem and love of the cross are also the ordinary 
effects of the perfect love of Jesus Christ. A person 
who loves our living Saviour affectionately, has no 
difficulty in entering into His sentiments. He easily 
conforms himself to His inclinations and His desires ; 
he respects whatever He esteems ; he finds attractions 
in all that He loves : he feels nothing but disgust for 
what displeases Him. It may be said, that this con- 
formity of desires and sentiments is a necessary effect 
of true love. Hence also springs that wonderful love 
of the cross, in all those who ardently love Jesus Christ. 
We find a difficulty in the exercises of piety; our 
Lord's yoke seems heavy, the very name of cross and 
humiliation alarms us ; and yet there are numbers of 
persons of all ages, of various characters and ranks, 
who find so much delight in crosses, that they would 
be inconsolable were they, for a moment, without 
suffering. How are we to account for such difference 
of sentiments ? It is because we have but little love 
for Jesus Christ, whilst they love Him much. To be 
without suffering in this life, seemed to St. Teresa 
more bitter than death. St. Mary Magdalen, of Pazzi, 
only felt death hard, because it deprived her of the 
pleasure she enjoyed in the sufferings of this life; 
Both were ardent lovers of Jesus Christ. 

The view of Jesus Christ, said a great servant of 
God, makes the cross so sweet, that it seems to me 
impossible to be happy without it. I feel disposed to 
remain all my life without any consolation, even spfc 
ritual. The love of Jesus Christ is everything to me. 
The cross has its charms, and whoever loves Jesus 
Christ perfectly, finds ineffable delight in crosses. We 
have not the same sentiments, because we have not the 
same love. 

" Many persons fly from the cross," says the author 



Digitized by Google 



172 



THIRD PART. 



of the Interior Christian, " under the idea of glorifying 
God in a more exalted manner, by important actions 
for the good of their neighbour. But they do not see 
that this is merely an effect of their self-love, not of 
the love of Jesus Christ. We must serve Him in His 
way, and not in our own. His love ought to inspire us 
with sentiments conformable to His. Jesus Christ loved 
the cross to excess. We cannot fail to love the cross, 
if we really love Jesus Christ. This love of Jesus 
Christ daily produces a greater desire of loving Him in 
those who love Him, and the more perfect this love is, 
the more ardent will be this desire. 

The last effect of this love is a high esteem and a 
great veneration for everything connected with Jesus 
Christ. We feel an insatiable hunger after Holy Com- 
munion. The mere representation of Jesus Christ in- 
spires devotion when we love Him. We pronounce 
His divine words with profound respect, and the very 
name of Jesus causes in us an increase of His love. 
In the world, even the lowest servants of persons of 
rank are honoured. Their arms are treated with 
respect. Whatever bears their name or their livery is 
safe from insult. The poor bear a special relationship 
to Jesus Christ. They, in a special manner, wear His 
livery. Jesus Christ acknowledges what is done for 
them as done for Himself. Charity, then, towards the 
poor is the ordinary effect of the true love of Jesus 
Christ. This love inspires us not only with compassion 
for the poor, but also with affection and a certain 
respect, which has sometimes led the greatest monarchs 
to serve them with their own hands. We feel a certain 
pleasure in giving alms to them ; we do not know how 
to refuse a poor person, being convinced that we reject 
Jesus Christ in their persons, and we feel that this 
charity is more or less ardent, in proportion as we have 
a more or less ardent love for Jesus Christ. We may 
ascertain by these signs whether we love Jesus Christ 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTEE V. 



173 



perfectly. The more ardent.our love, the more evident 
will be these signs. Nor can we have less equivocal 
proofs of our love than these effects. 

As we do not undertake to relate here all that the love 
of Jesus Christ operates in pure souls, we will say 
nothing of all these wonders, which are rare, only 
because pure souls are rarely found ; it is enough to 
say, that as soon as a soul is inflamed with this divine 
love, she loses all relish and affection for creatures. 
Her desires can no longer find their object in earthly 
things. They are directed only in search of Jesus 
Christ, the centre of their repose. The soul then 
sends forth deep sighs from time to time; a secret 
languor slowly consumes the body. The impression of 
divine love increases to such a degree, that she can do 
nothing but seek her God continually. She is occupied 
with Him at all times, and in all places, whether she 
be at rest or working, whether she sleep or watch, pray 
or recreate herself. She continually thinks of the 
Object of her love, and has no wish but to love and 
please Him. But, to attain to this, we must continually 
purify ourselves more and more, renounce every other 
love, and eradicate from our minds all ideas, which have 
no reference to Jesus Christ. 

The devotion to the Sacred Heart, according to the 
method we offer in this book, is a sure and certain 
means of attaining this sublime state of perfection, and 
of acquiring that exalted virtue we have described. All 
the practices of this devotion tend to give us an ardent 
and affectionate love of Jesus Christ, and this sublime 
perfection consists in the perfect love of Him. 

Adorable Heart of my Divine Saviour, seat of all 
virtues, treasury of all graces, refuge of all holy souls ; 
Sacred Heart, Who art the object of the complacency 
of the Eternal Father, Heart worthy to reign over all 
hearts, to possess the hearts of men and angels ; 
Adorable Heart of my beloved Jesus, Who lovest us 



Digitized by Google 



174 



THIRD PAHT. 



with bo marvellous a tenderness, and Who art, never- 
theless, so little loved by those whom Thou lovest so 
tenderly : why cannot I, oh my loving Jesus, go to every 
place upon the earth, and make known to all, the in- 
effable sweetness and the extraordinary graces, Thou 
bestowest so abundantly on all those who honour Thee, 
and love Thee with their whole hearts! Accept at 
least the sacrifice I make to Thee of mine, and the 
ardent desire I feel that Thou shouldst be blessed and 
praised by angels and men, eternally loved, eternally 
honoured and glorified. 



CHAPTER VI. 

Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus for the 
day of the Feast. 

Although Almighty God should be the end and motive 
of all our actions, and all the days of our life belong to 
Him, by so many titles He has, however, ordained that 
certain days of the year should be specially consecrated 
to Him. Thus He appointed certain solemn festivals 
in the Old Testament, and for the same reason the 
Church has also her particular festivals, and distin- 
guishes certain days of the year with greater solemnities. 
Though we are always obliged to love Jesus Christ, we 
have great reason to believe, that our dear Lord has 
wished a certain day to be fixed, on which this love 
should display itself in a more particular manner. As 
there was a day specially appointed for honouring His 
precious Body in the Adorable Sacrament, and as other 
days were consecrated in honour of His Sacred Wounds, 
so He has willed that there should be one fixed for 
honouring His Sacred Heart. The feast of the precious 
Body of Jesus Christ is celebrated by exposition of the 
most blessed Sacrament, by solemn processions, and 
other magnificent functions. The feast of His Sacred 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VI. 



175 



Heart should be solemnized, wherever it is established, 
with evident marks of the most sincere and most ardent 
love of Jesus Christ in the Blessed Sacrament. 

Though we have elsewhere mentioned that Jesus 
Christ has Himself chosen the day for this Feast, it 
will not be out of place to repeat it here. 

The person, whom we have named, being one day 
during the Octave of Corpus Christi in the presence of 
the Blessed Sacrament, replenished with more than 
ordinary graces, and touched with a desire of making 
some return, and rendering love for love, the Son of 
God appeared to her and said, that she could not da 
anything more pleasing to Him than what He had so 
often asked of her. " Then," she said, " my beloved 
Saviour, showing me His Divine Heart, said : ' Behold 
this Heart, which has loved men so much, that it has 
spared nothing, even so far as to consume itself, in 
order to show them Its love ; and in return, I receive 
from the greater number only ingratitude, irreverence, 
and sacrileges. But what is more afflicting to Me is, 
that I receive this treatment from hearts which are 
consecrated to Me. Therefore I ask of Thee, that the 
first Friday after the Octave of the Blessed Sacrament 
be dedicated as a special festival in honour of My 
Heart ; that a reparation of honour be made with an 
act of atonement, and that Holy Communion be re- 
ceived on that day, to repair the insults It has received 
when It has been exposed on the Altars, and I promise 
thee that my Heart shall dilate Itself to pour out 
abundantly the influences of Its divine love on those 
who shall render It this honour.' " 

We see from these words what this practice is, what 
profit we should derive from it, and what is its fruit. 
In order to receive without fail the great graces which 
God promises us through the practice of this devotion, 
and especially an ardent love of Him, which is the 
greatest of all His graces, we should do as follows : — 



Digitized by Google 



176 



THIRD PART. 



The Feast (when it is established) begins on the last 
day of the Octave of Corpus Christi. We may spend 
part of this day in reading some chapters of this book, 
especially the first, second, and third of the first part, 
that we may understand well the motive that should 
influence us on this feast, and what should be our dis- 
positions, and with what sentiments we should perform 
all the exercises of this devotion. We should spend 
all the time we can, before the Blessed Sacrament, with 
profound respect. Each of us may recite there the Rosary 
or other prayers, as his devotion suggests. Towards 
evening we should spend an hour, or half an hour, in 
reading attentively and with reflection the first chapter 
of the third part. This lecture or consideration will 
serve as a meditation, and will help us much in pre- 
paring for the feast of the following day. We should 
be particularly careful to spend, as far as we can, the 
rest of the day in silence ; for interior recollection is a 
necessary disposition for this devotion. We should do 
well to spend, if we can, about a quarter of an hour, 
before retiring to rest, in reflecting on the motive of the 
feast we are going to celebrate, and on the sentiments 
awakened within us during the consideration we have 
made. We may reflect how reasonable it is to have an 
ardent love of Jesus Christ, and to repair, as far as we 
are able, the insults which He receives, in the most 
loving of all mysteries, from those who will not love 
Him. We must avow to Jesus Christ our desire to 
pass the remainder of the night, were it possible, at the 
foot of the Altar, beseeching our angel guardian to 
supply our place, and preparing ourselves to testify, on 
the following day, the sincerity of our desire, by our 
diligence in going to the Church. We must endeavour 
to keep alive these good sentiments, and if we awake in 
the night, we must immediately adore Jesus Christ in 
the Adorable Eucharist, and renew the desire we have 
to go and visit Him. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VI. 



177 



We must, if we can, consecrate the whole of the 
following day to honouring the Sacred Heart of Jesus in 
the most Blessed Sacrament, and should keep ourselves 
free from all unnecessary business, and from anything 
that can easily be deferred to another time. We must 
carefully avoid all useless occupations. The least 
moment of such a day is infinitely precious. As soon 
as we have risen, we must prostrate ourselves and 
adore Jesus Christ, accompanying this act of adoration 
with all the sentiments which a heart, deeply touched 
and inflamed with love, is capable of feeling. We 
must offer to Him all that we shall do in honour of His 
Sacred Heart, and with a view to acknowledge His love 
and His benefits. Those who are so happy as to have 
Jesus Christ in their own house, must make more haste 
than ever to be the first to visit Him. Others must 
try to do so as soon as possible. Confession should be 
accompanied, if possible, by a more perfect contrition 
than usual, at the thought of so much ingratitude, and 
of our own acts of irreverence, of which we should do 
well to accuse ourselves, if not in particular, at least in 
general. We must omit nothing in order to make a 
good preparation for holy Communion. As on this day 
Communion is received to repair the defects in all 
previous Communions, it is unnecessary to say with 
what devotion we should communicate. Our profound 
respect in the presence of Jesus Christ must be a proof 
of our ardent desire to repair all past irreverence. The 
ardent love, the tender devotion, and the lively faith 
with which we communicate must be a mark of our 
sincere desire to repair, as far as we can, the coldness, 
the incredulity, and the irreverence with which so 
many have communicated. Moved with sensible grief 
at seeing Jesus Christ so little loved, and even outraged 
in the adorable Eucharist, we must receive Him as an 
angry God, Whom we wish to appease by this action ; 
as an offended Saviour, with Whom we wish to be 

N 

Digitized by Google 



X78 



THIRD PART. 



reconciled ; as a Spouse, disgusted by our indifference, 
Whom we desire to love perfectly for the future. Full 
of tender and affectionate sentiments, we must approach 
the holy table with unusual modesty and profound 
humility. As we should be chiefly influenced in this 
action by an ardent love of Jesus Christ, this love will 
inspire each one with the sentiments, the affections, and 
the acts that he should produce at this precious time. 
Immediately after Communion, comparing the excessive 
love of Jesus Christ with our extreme ingratitude, 
humbly prostrate at His feet, humbled in mind, and 
with a heart pierced with grief at the sight of so many 
insults, we must make, with particular devotion, the 
act of reparation. In this our heart must have more 
share than our lips, or rather our lips must only 
interpret the sentiments of our heart. We then make 
the act of consecration to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, 
and the offering which will be found in the eighth 
chapter of this last part. We must endeavour to spend 
the remainder of the day in great interior recollection, 
passing, if possible, the whole morning, or at least a 
great part of it, before the Blessed Sacrament, and the 
entire day in the practice of good works, and especially 
in a continual exercise of love towards Jesus Christ by 
frequent acts, each one according to his devotion. 
Towards evening we must make the appointed medita- 
tion for this day. If, however, our state, our employ- 
ments or duties should prevent us from making it, it 
would be well at least to read it attentively, and to 
remain some time in silence, giving scope to the senti- 
ments of devotion we have conceived. We may pray 
at each hour of the day, and then make some spiritual 
reading out of this book. Nothing should be neglected 
which may prove to Jesus Christ how much we love Him, 
and how greatly we desire to see Him ardently loved. 
As religious persons have the advantage of possessing 
Jesus Christ in their own houses, they ought on that 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VI. 



179 



day to be assiduous in paying Him their homage, pass- 
ing all the time at their disposal, before the Blessed 
Sacrament. Secular persons should also spend more 
time than usual, and both must endeavour to visit Him 
at least five times on this day, with special devotion. 

The first visit should be made to thank Jesus Christ 
for the infinite love He has shown us in instituting this 
mystery. 

The second, in thanksgiving for all the times we 
have received Him in the adorable Eucharist and for 
all the special blessings that we have received through 
It. 

The third, to make him a kind of reparation for all 
the outrages He has received from infidels and heretics. 

The fourth, to repair, as far as possible, by profound 
respect, and every kind of homage, the irreverences, 
the acts of impiety, and the sacrileges, which Catholics 
themselves have committed against Him. 

The fifth, must be expressly to adore Jesus Christ in 
spirit in all the Churches, of the town or country, 
where He dwells in the most Blessed Sacrament, 
where He is abandoned by almost all, and where He is 
kept with so little reverence, so rarely* visited, and so 
universally forgotten. 

As the love of Jesus Christ is the chief motive of all 
these practices of devotion, many persons, in order to 
please Jesus Christ the more, add many other good 
works, which love suggests to them, and which all tend 
to the same end. Some visit on that day, all, or at 
least some of the Churches in which the Blessed 
Sacrament is kept, and endeavour, by their devotion 
and modesty to repair the profanations and contempt 
which Jesus Christ has suffered. Others induce some 
poor persons to go to confession and communion on 
this day, and after giving them a good meal, dismiss 
them with an alms. Many accompany these practices 
of devotion with some austerities. All in general 

k 2 



Digitized by Google 



180 



THIRD PART, 



should try to do what they can "with lively faith, 
fervour, and particular devotion, and with most ardent 
love of Jesus Christ. 

Chapter VII. 

Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus for 
every month, every week, every day, and for certain 
hours every day. 

It is not necessary to appoint certain days and certain 
hours for particular exercises of devotion when there is 
an ardent love of Jesus Christ. For whoever loves 
much, says St. Augustin, never fails to give proofs of 
it. It is however useful to point out certain periods for 
testifying this love more particularly. This is what we 
propose to do in the present Chapter. 

I. Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus for the 
first Friday in every month. 

The first Friday of every month is particularly ap- 
pointed for honouring the Sacred Heart of Jesus. The 
practices of devotion for it, are very much the same, as 
those which we £ave pointed out for the day of the feast, 
and we should undertake them with the same motive. 
We should prepare for it the day before, by reading the 
first Chapter of the third part of this book, and passing 
some time, on the Thursday evening, before the Blessed 
Sacrament. The following day, immediately on rising, 
we should offer to Jesus Christ, and consecrate in 
honour of His Sacred Heart, all the actions of the day. 
We should endeavour to go as soon as possible to the 
Church, where we shall find it easy, if we really love 
Jesus Christ, to conceive a great sorrow for all the 
insults He has received in the adorable Eucharist. It 
will not be difficult to obtain this true love of Jesus 
Christ, if we reflect ever so little on the motives we have 
for loving Him. We may accuse ourselves in confes- 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VIT. 



181 



sion of all the defects we have been guilty of in the 
presence of our divine Saviour in this adorable mys- 
tery, and of the negligence with which we have received 
and visited Him. We should communicate in the 
same dispositions and for the same intention as on the 
day of the feast, and we should make the act of repa- 
ration, and the act of consecration, with all possible 
devotion, and in the sentiments of one, who ardently 
loves Jesus Christ, and grieves deeply to see Him 
so little loved. We must endeavour to keep alive these 
sentiments during the day. In the evening for an 
hour or half an hour, we can make the meditation we 
have assigned for the first Friday in every month. We 
must remember to make on this day the five visits, the 
motives of which we have explained in the preceding 
Chapter. We may add to the good works we are 
accustomed to perform every day, some alms, or 
penance, to make atonement, on our part, as far as we 
can, for the insults and outrages which Jesus Christ 
has endured, and still endures every day in the Blessed 
Sacrament. We should often think, during the day, on 
the sentiments He must have,, at the sight of our in- 
gratitude, and on the admirable dispositions His Sacred 
Heart still retains in our behalf. Each one will see 
how necessary, for all this, are silence, retirement, and 
interior recollection. We should visit the adorable 
Sacrament more frequently and with more respect and 
devotion than usual, and should continually excite 
ourselves during the day to love Jesus Christ with a 
love of tenderness. This we can do, without neglect- 
ing our occupations, or our necessary employments ; 
entreating our beloved Saviour to open to us His 
Sacred Heart and to grant us the grace to dwell there 
the rest of our days. 

Besides these exercises of piety, charity towards our 
neighbour, which is an ordinary effect of the true love 
of Jesus Christ, obliges all who have a devotion to His 



Digitized by Google 



182 



THIRD PART. 



Sacred Heart, to pray particularly every month for 
all, whom the same love unites, in a more strict and 
special manner, in this Sacred Heart. All Priests who 
practise this devotion, should say Mass every month for 
all who have a devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
Christ, offering this divine Sacrifice for all the neces- 
sities of these chosen souls, begging our Lord to increase 
their number, and to inflame the hearts of all who 
truly love Him, with a more and more ardent love. 
Those who are not Priests should offer up holy Commu- 
nion once a month for the same object. Besides the 
merit of this act of charity, it has also this advantage, 
that all who practise the devotion to the Sacred Heart 
of Jesus may be certain, that a very great number of 
very virtuous persons, and of those who love Jesus 
Christ most ardently, pray particularly for them every 
month. This charity should also include those, who, 
having practised this devotion during life, are suffering 
after death in Purgatory, for whose relief we must offer 
the adorable sacrifice, or our Communion. 

As this devotion has no other object, but to procure 
an ardent and perfect love of Jesus Christ, and to 
repair, as far as possible, all the insults that have been 
offered Him, and are still daily offered Him in the 
adorable Eucharist, it is quite clear that it is not so 
confined to certain days, that it cannot be practised at 
other times also. Jesus Christ is at all times 
deserving of our love. He is always despised and ill- 
treated by men in this adorable mystery. It is most 
juBt, then, that at all times, reparation should be made 
Him, so that whoever is prevented from performing this 
devotion on the first Friday of the month, can do so on 
another day of the month. In every month, the first 
day of Communion may be consecrated to so religious a 
practice, by endeavouring to do on that day what could 
not be done on the first Friday of the month. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER Vir. 



183 



II. Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus for 
every week. 

The Friday in each week is also an appropriate day 
for honouring, specially the Sacred Heart of Jesus. 
Our beloved Saviour gave us on this day too evident 
marks of His love, for us not to make Him some return 
of love. Jesus Christ has shown us plainly, how 
pleasing it is to Him, that the whole of this day should 
be consecrated in honour of His Sacred Heart. We 
should therefore offer and consecrate to Him all that we 
are going to do during the day, wishing to do a great 
deal, but especially to perform well all we have to do, 
in order to honour more particularly His Sacred Heart, 
The desire of repairing the contempt and the insults, 
that Jesus Christ has received in the Adorable Sacra- 
ment, and to give Him marks of our love and gratitudej 
should be the motive of every practice of this devotion. 
Priests should offer up Mass on this day, for this in- 
tention. Those who are not Priests, and can com- 
municate, would do well to do so. They should at least 
assist at Mass with more respect and devotion than 
usual, with the intention of repairing, as far as pos- 
sible, by their love and homage, the insults and outrages 
to which love exposes Jesus Christ in this adorable 
mystery. They should offer up this divine sacrifice for 
this end, and may communicate spiritually. If any 
thing prevents them from assisting at Mass, they must 
endeavour to supply for it by some other exercise of 
devotion. But no one should omit the following points. 
The first is, to excite and keep up during the day, a 
great sorrow at seeing Jesus Christ so forgotten, so 
little loved, and unworthily treated by men in that state 
especially, where this loving Saviour more manifestly 
shows to men, the excess of his liberality and His love. 
The second is, to visit on this day the adorable Sacra- 
ment with more respect and devotion than usual, and 



Digitized by Google 



184 



THIRD PART 



with the intention, of making reparation by our love, for 
the ingratitude of men, towards Jesus Christ in the 
Blessed Sacrament. If, however, our occupations and 
obligations prevent us from making these frequent 
visits, we may at least adore Him in spirit from the 
place where we are, and supply by interior acts for the 
want of these exterior marks of devotion. We may 
enter, from time to time, as it were, into the adorable 
Heart of Jesus, considering what are the sentiments of 
our loving Saviour towards us, and the earnest desire 
He has to fill us with His graces, and inflame us with 
His love. 

These reflections which may be made at any time, and 
in any place, cannot fail to inspire us with affectionate 
sentiments, suited to the intention we propose to our- 
selves in this devotion. It will suffice for this, if we 
are careful to enter into ourselves from time to time, 
if we keep silence a little more, and endeavour to be less 
dissipated, and more recollected. This practice is 
suited to all kinds of persons. It is extremely useful ; 
nor is it easy to express what great favours and graces, 
even sensible ones, it procures for those who are careful 
and faithful in frequently making use of it. The third 
point we should bear in mind on this day, is, to 
perform some good work, or little act of mortification, 
exterior or interior, with the same motive, and for the 
same intention. 

We may read such parts of this book as are best 
suited to excite in us an ardent love of Jesus Christ, 
and we must try to find half, or a quarter of an hour, to 
make the meditation assigned for the first Friday in 
each month. 

HI. Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus for 
every day. 

Besides these exercises of devotion to the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus, for every year, every month, and every 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER TO. 



185 



week ; we must also have certain hours every day, at 
which to think more particularly of Jesus Christ and to 
honour His Sacred Heart, by giving Him more particular 
proofs of our gratitude and our love. The morning, as 
soon as we rise, the time of Mass, certain hours of the 
afternoon, and the period before retiring to rest, are the 
most suitable times for this purpose. In the morning, 
immediately on rising, we may prostrate ourselves, after 
the example of many Saints, in the direction of the 
nearest Church, where we know that the Blessed 
Sacrament reposes, and while in this position, make an 
act of faith, adore Jesus Christ in this august Sacra- 
ment, and love Him with tenderness, for this love 
is as easy as it is reasonable. After thanking Him for 
instituting this mystery of love, and declaring the grief 
we feel at seeing Him so outraged, and the desire we 
have of visiting Him as soon as possible, and of loving 
Him continually, we may recite some prayer, protesting 
that we wish to have no desire or sentiment during the 
whole day, but what is conformable to the desire and 
sentiments of the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ. 

The time of Mass is certainly one of the best for 
honouring and loving the adorable Heart of Jesus Christ. 
We do not give any particular practice for this precious 
time. The love of Jesus Christ, which ought to 
occupy us all at this time, does not fail to inspire each 
one with what is most appropriate. We have only to 
consider with faith, what Mass really is, and to assist 
at it with deep respect and singular modesty, in other 
words, like one who really believes. A little before the 
Priest's Communion, we may make the act of consecra- 
tion. We must communicate spiritually, that is, we 
must have a great love of Jesus Christ, and a great 
desire to receive Him. The rest of the Mass should 
be employed, in thanking Jesus Christ for having loved 
us to such a degree, as to institute this mystery, in 
asking pardon for the ingratitude of men, who value 



Digitized by Google 



186 



THIRD PART. 



this mystery so little, and lastly, in endeavouring 
to supply for their irreverence and insensibility by our 
adorations, and our ardent love. Priests, who have the 
happiness of offering up this divine Sacrifice, will feel 
more devotion every day ; their faith will become daily 
more perfect. Jesus Christ will fill them with greater 
graces, and they will daily love Him more, if they 
remember to offer up daily this divine Sacrifice, with 
the intention of repairing, as far as possible, by 
means of this adorable Victim, the insults which Jesus 
Christ receives in this adorable Mystery ; and if when 
Jesus Christ is present before them, they are careful to 
adore His Sacred Heart. All who visit the Blessed 
Sacrament, or assist at Mass, should do the same, and 
it will be difficult not to feel devotion, and behave with 
respect in the presence of Jesus Christ, when we go 
before Him with no other end, than to make Him this 
reparation of honour, and to atone by this very action, 
for the irreverences and insults which He has received. 

The afternoon is also a very fitting time for honour- 
ing the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ and for proving 
our love to Him. As this is the time when Jesus 
Christ is visited by comparatively few persons, those 
who go to visit Him at this time, are sure to be 
well received. It is not difficult to find a quarter, or 
half a quarter, of an hour in the afternoon, to go and 
adore Jesus Christ in the Blessed Sacrament 

It cannot be custom that induces us to go at that 
time, nor is it the crowd that draws us. It is therefore 
evident that these visits are the effect of pure love, and 
consequently they are abundant sources of grace, for 
Jesus Christ never allows Himself to be surpassed hi 
liberality. The love of Jesus will assuredly occupy us 
during these visits. This love is usually more sen* 
sensibly felt, when we give these sensible marks of a 
true, faithful, and constant love. 
- At night, before retiring to rest, we should adore the 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VII. 



187 



Sacred Heart of Jesus, regarding It as a place of 
refuge and of retirement, in which we wish to take our 
rest. 

We should also thank Jesus Christ for having 
instituted the Blessed Sacrament. Though it is the 
greatest of all benefits, there are few who thank Him 
for it. We should make many acts of contrition and 
love, towards a God so loving, and Who loves us in- 
finitely. It was a practice of St. Aloysius, to recite 
every night immediately before retiring to rest, three 
Hail Mary 's, to place himself specially under the pro- 
tection, and as it were, in the Heart of the Blessed 
Virgin. He would afterwards make a profound re- 
verence in the direction of the Church to adore the 
Blessed Sacrament, entreating the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus who watches continually over all the Church, and 
in particular over those who love Him tenderly, to 
preserve him, by His mercy, from all the artifices 
of the enemy ; declaring, that in that Sacred Heart he 
desired to take his repose, saying with the Author 
of the Imitation of Jesus Christ : In pace, in idipmm, 
hoc est in te uno summo bono, dormiam et requiescam. 

Such, then, is a method of practising the devotion 
to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ. But we must 
remember that, as, with the true love of Jesus Christ, 
respect and veneration for the most Blessed Sacrament 
form the distinguishing characteristics of this devotion 
and of all these practices, so all who perform them, 
should distinguish themselves by their assiduity, their 
profound respect, and their modesty, in presence of the 
Blessed Sacrament. Thus, an ardent love of Jesus 
Christ, and a special devotion towards the Adorable 
Eucharist, should be their peculiar characteristic. 

This love should be the spring of all our desires* the 
end of all our thoughts. In a word, the true love of 
Jesus Christ, should be the principal object and motive 
of all these practices. And most certainly, if we per* 



Digitized by Google 



188 



THIRD PART. 



severe with fidelity in these holy practices, we shall 
soon find this perfect love sensibly increase within 
us. 

This devotion is so dear to Jesus Christ, that it seems 
as if He could refuse nothing to, those who practise it. 
This is what our Divine Saviour promised to the person 
whom He employed, to inspire the faithful with it. It 
is what experience has happily confirmed, and continues 
daily to prove. 

We must also take notice : 1st, never to fail to adore 
in a tender and affectionate manner the Heart of Jesus 
Christ, every time we go before the Blessed Sacrament 
of the altar ; 2nd, to visit It as frequently and as re- 
spectfully as we can, and to inspire all kinds of persons 
with this devotion. For it is the property of the per- 
fect love of Jesus Christ, to inspire the desire, not only 
of loving Him daily more and more, but also of seeing 
Him every day more known, and more respectfully 
adored, more frequently visited, and more ardently 
loved. 

Chapter VIE. 

Exercises of this Devotion. 

Under the name of exercises of this devotion, are 
understood the act of Reparation, the Act of Consecra- 
tion, and the other vocal prayers, which are offered 
to Jesus Christ on certain days of the year, more 
specially dedicated to the honour of His Sacred Heart ; 
as also the Meditations which may be made on these 
days. 

It is well to remark here, that though these exercises 
are assigned to certain days in the year, they are not 
so limited to these days, as not to be also most useful 
at any other time, provided they are performed with 
devotion. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VIII. 



189 



Act of Reparation to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ, to 
be made brfore the Blessed Sacrament on the Friday 
after the Octave of Corpus Christi, and which it may 
be well to renew on the first Friday in each month, after" 
Communion. 

Most adorable and most amiable Jesus I Ever full 
of love for us, ever touched with compassion for our 
miseries, ever actuated by the desire of making us 
partakers of Thy treasures, and of giving Thyself 
wholly to us : Jesus, my Saviour and my God, Who, 
through an excess of the most ardent and most won- 
derful love, hast placed Thyself in the condition of a 
victim, in the Adorable Eucharist, where Thou offerest 
Thyself for us in sacrifice so many times every day, 
what must be Thy sentiments in this state, at finding 
no return for all this, in the hearts of the greater part 
of men, but hardness, forgetfulness, ingratitude and con- 
tempt ! Was it not enough, Oh my God, to have taken 
the most painful means of saving us, when Thou couldst 
have shown us Thy excessive love at much less cost ? 
Was it not enough to abandon Thyself once to that cruel 
agony, and deadly sorrow, caused in Thee by the hor- 
rible sight of our sins, with which Thou wast loaded ? 
Why wilt Thou still expose Thyself daily to all the 
insults of which the unspeakable malice of men and 
devils is capable ? Ah ! my God and my most loving 
Redeemer, what are the sentiments of Thy Sacred 
Heart at the sight of all this ingratitude, and of all 
these sins ? How great was the bitterness with which 
so many sacrileges, and so many outrages, afflicted and 
tormented Thy Heart ? 

Moved by extreme sorrow for all these insults, be- 
hold me prostrate and annihilated before Thee, to make 
Thee an act of reparation in the sight of Heaven 
and earth, for all the irreverences and the outrages 
which Thou hast received on our Altars, since the 



Digitized by Google 



190 



THIRD PART. 



institution of this adorable Sacrament. With a heart 
humbled and broken with grief, I ask of Thee a thou- 
sand and a thousand times pardon for all these indig- 
nities. Why cannot I, oh my God, wash with my 
blood every spot where Thy Sacred Heart has been 
so horribly outraged, and the greatest proof of Thy love 
received with such incredible contempt. Why cannot 
I, by some new kind of homage, humiliation and anni- 
hilation, repair so many sacrileges and profanations? 
Why cannot I, for one moment, be master of the hearts 
of all men, that I might repair, in some manner, by 
the sacrifice of all of them to Thee, the forgetfulness 
and insensibility of all those who refuse to know Thee, 
or who, though knowing Thee, have loved Thee so 
little? 

But oh, my beloved Saviour, what covers me still 
more with confusion, and should fill me with greater 
grief is, that I also have been of the number of these 
ungrateful souls. My God, Who seest the depths of 
my heart, Thou knowest my sorrow for my ingrati- 
tude, and my distress at seeing Thee thus unworthily 
treated. Thou knowest how I am disposed to do 
and suffer all, in order to repair them. Behold me 
then, oh Lord, my heart penetrated with the deepest 
grief, humbled and prostrate, ready to receive from 
Thy hand, whatever it shall please Thee to require of 
me in reparation for so many outrages. I shall bless 
and kiss a hundred times the hand that shall inflict 
upon me so just a punishment. Why am I not a 
victim capable of repairing so many injuries ? Why 
cannot I bathe and wash with my tears and blood 
every spot, where Thy Sacred Body has been thrown 
to the ground, and trampled under foot ? Too happy 
should I be, if I could, by every possible torment, 
repair such outrages, such contempt, and such acts of 
impiety ! If I do not merit this grace, accept at least 
the true desire I have of it. Receive, oh Eternal 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VIII. 



191 



Father, this act of reparation which I make Thee in 
union with that which was made to Thee by this 
Sacred Heart on Calvary, and with that which Mary 
also made at the foot of the cross of her Son. Pardon 
the many negligences and irreverences I have com- 
mitted, and give me grace to carry out the resolution 
I now make, of neglecting nothing, in order that I 
may ardently love and honour, in every way possible, 
my Sovereign, my Saviour, and my Judge, Whom I 
believe to be really present in the Adorable Eucharist. 
I intend to show in future, by my respect in His 
presence, my assiduity in visiting Him, that I believe 
Him to be really present. And as I profess to honour 
in a special manner His Sacred Heart, I desire to 
spend the rest of my life in this same Heart. Grant 
me the grace which I beg of Thee, that I may breathe 
out my last sigh in this Divine Heart, at the hour of 
my death. Amen. 

Act of Consecration to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. 

[It should be borne in mind that by the words con- 
secration and donation, which are sometimes used in 
this act, it is not intended to make a vow, but merely 
a resolution.] 

Adorable Heart of my beloved Jesus, seat of all the 
virtues, inexhaustible fountain of all graces, what 
couldst Thou see in me worthy of Thy affection, that 
Thou shouldst love me to such an excess, whilst, de- 
filed with so many sins, my heart felt nothing for Thee 
but hardness and indifference ? The wonderful proofs 
of the tenderness of Thy love for me, even when I did 
not love Thee, make me hope that Thou wilt accept 
the proofs by which I desire to declare to Thee, that I 
do love Thee. Accept, then, oh my adorable Saviour, 
the desire I feel of consecrating myself entirely to the 
honour and the glory of Thy Sacred Heart. Accept 



Digitized by Google 



192 



THIRD PAET. 



the donation I make to Thee of all that I am. I con- 
secrate to Thee my person, my life, my actions, my 
labours and sufferings, desiring nothing in future, but 
to be a victim consecrated to Thy glory. May I be 
now set on fire, and some day, if it please Thee, be 
wholly consumed by the sacred flames of Thy love. I 
offer Thee, then, oh my Lord and my God, my heart 
with all the sentiments of which it is capable. I desire 
that they may be always perfectly conformed to the 
sentiments of Thy Sacred Heart. Behold me, then, 
oh Lord, entirely in accordance with Thy Heart, behold 
me altogether Thine. Oh my God ! how great are 
Thy mercies towards me ! God of Majesty ! Who am 
I that Thou shouldst deign to accept the sacrifice of 
my heart? This heart shall be in future wholly 
Thine. Creatures shall have no share in it, to Thy 
prejudice. Be Thou in future, my beloved Jesus, my 
Father, my friend, my master, and my all. I wish to 
live only for Thee. Receive then, oh loving Saviour of 
mankind, the sacrifice that the most ungrateful of all 
mankind makes to Thy Sacred Heart, to repair the 
injury which hitherto it has never ceased to inflict 
upon It by corresponding so ill with Its love. It. is 
but little, indeed, that I give to It ; but at least I give 
all I can, and all that I know It desires. I consecrate 
to It my heart. I give it, and will take it back no 
more. 

Teach me, oh my loving Saviour, the perfect forget- 
fulness of myself, since this is the only path that can 
give me entrance into Thy Sacred Heart. As I shall 
do nothing in future but for Thee, grant that all that I 
do may be worthy of Thee. Teach me what I must do 
to attain to the purity of Thy love. Do Thou give me 
this love, a most ardent and generous love. Give me 
that profound humility, without which no one can 
please Thee, and accomplish in me all Thy holy desires 
both in time and eternity. Amen. 



Digitized by Google 



.CHAPTER VJII. 



193 



. Offering to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ. 

Fr. la Colombiere, of whom we have already spoken, 
having found, by his own experience, how useful the 
devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus is, for speedily 
enkindling in the heart a great love of Jesus Christ, 
and for attaining a high perfection in a short time, 
composed this offering, and renewed it several times a 
month with great devotion. This offering, he says, is 
made to honour the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ, the 
seat of all the virtues, the source of all blessings, and 
the refuge of holy souls. 

The principal virtues which we design to honour in 
Him are, first, a most ardent love of God His Father, 
joined to a profound respect, and the greatest humility 
that ever existed. In the second place, an infinite 
patience in sufferings, an excessive grief and contrition 
for the sins which He had taken upon Himself, the 
confidence of a most affectionate son, joined to the con- 
fusion of a great sinner. In the third place, a most 
lively compassion for our miseries, and an immense 
love for us, notwithstanding these miseries ; and not- 
withstanding these affections, each of which He pos- 
sessed in the highest degree possible ; an unalterable 
equanimity, arising from so perfect a oonformity to the 
will of God, that it could not be disturbed by any event, 
however contrary it might appear to His zeal, His 
humility, His love itself, or to any other of His other 
dispositions. This Heart is still, as far as it can be 
so, in the same sentiments. It is, above all, constantly 
burning with an ardent love for men, though in return 
for all this, He meets, in the hearts of these very nien, 
with nothing but hardness, forgetfulness, contempt and 
ingratitude. He loves, and He is not loved. We do 
not even know His love, because we will not condescend 
to receive the gifts by which, He desires to manifest it, 

o 



Digitized by Google 



194 



THIRD PART. 



nor listen to the sweet and tender declarations He 
would make of it to our hearts. 

In reparation for so many outrages, and for such 
cruel ingratitude, O most adorable and most amiable 
Heart of my Jesus, and to avoid, as far as it is in my 
power, falling into a similar misfortune, I offer Thee my 
heart, with all the affections of which it is capable. I 
give myself entirely to Thee. From this hour I protest 
sincerely that I desire to forget myself, and all that in 
any way relates to me, in order to remove any obstacle 
that might prevent my entrance into this Divine Heart, 
which Thou hast the goodness to open to me, and into 
which I desire to enter, to live and die therein together 
with Thy most faithful servants. Filled with Thy love, 
and burning with its flames, I offer to Thy Heart all 
the merit, all the satisfaction of all the Masses, all the 
prayers, of all the acts of mortification, all the religious 
exercises, all the actions of zeal, humility and obe- 
dience, and of all the other virtues that I may practise 
to the last moment of my life. Not only do I offer all 
these, in honour of the Sacred Heart of Jesus, and of Its 
admirable dispositions, but I also earnestly beg Him 
to accept the entire donation I make Him of them, to 
dispose of them in the manner most pleasing to Him, 
and in favour of whomsoever He pleases. And, as I 
have already given over, to the holy souls in Purgatory 
anything there may be in my actions, capable of satisfy- 
ing the divine justice, I desire also that it be distributed 
to them according to the good will of the Heart of Jesus. 

This will not prevent my fulfilling any obligations I 
am under of saying Masses, and of praying for certain 
intentions prescribed by obedience, nor from saying 
through charity Masses for the poor, for my brethren 
and friends, who might request them of me. But, as I 
then make use of a treasure that does not belong to me, 
I intend, as is just, that the obedience, charity, and 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER VIII. 



195 



<)ther virtues I may practise on these occasions, may 
all belong to the Heart of Jesus, from which I have 
learned how to practise them. They, therefore, rightly 
belong to Him without reserve. 

Sacred Heart of Jesus, teach me the perfect forget- 
fulness of myself : teach me what I must do to attain 
to the purity of Thy love, of which Thou hast given me 
the desire. I feel within me a great desire of pleasing 
Thee, and a great impatience to carry out this desire in 
practice. But what can I do without a clear light and 
a most powerful help ? And this I can only look for 
from Thee. Accomplish in me Thy will, oh Lord. I 
oppose it, I know well. Yet it seems to me that I wish 
not to oppose it. It must be Thy work to do all, Divine 
Heart of my Jesus. Thou alone wilt have the glory of 
my sanctification if I become a Saint. This appears to 
me clearer than the day. It is for this alone that I 
wish to desire perfection. Amen. 

Act of love to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christy which may be 
_ made in visiting the Blessed Sacrament , after reflecting on 
the immense love which Jesus manifests towards us in this 
mystery j and on the forgetfulnesS and ingratitude which men 
show towards Jesus Christ. 

Permit me to turn to Thee, oh Divine and Adorable 
Heart of Jesus my Saviour, abyss of love and mercy, 
and to ask Thee, full of astonishment at the sight of 
Thy goodness and of my own ingratitude, why, oh my 
God, hast Thou invented a new method of immolating 
Thyself for me in the Divine Eucharist? Dost Thou 
think it little, oh Lord, to have once endured for me the 
scourges, pains, insults, and death of the Cross ? Now 
that Thou art glorious and immortal, must I still see 
Thee continually exposed to insults in Thy Sacrament 
of love, wherein Thou art so often despised, insulted, 
and trodden under foot even by those who ought to love 
Thee most ardently. Can I see myself in the number 

o 2 



Digitized by Google 



196 



THIRD PABT. 



of those Ungrateful wretches without dying of grief and 
shame ? Oh my God, pierce my heart with Thy love, 
and put an end to my ingratitude. Remember that 
Thy adorable Heart, bearing the weight of my sins on. 
Mount Olivet and on the Cross, was afflicted and grieved 
at the sight of my miseries. Do not permit that Thjr 
sadness and Thy sorrows, Thy Blood, Thy tears and 
Thy sweat