 
exalted virtue, become obstacles to sanctity ? 

* 6. What an error it is to imagine that there can be 
any age or condition unsuited to the practice of the 
highest virtues ! What will these persons say when 
they shall be shown a multitude of Saints of every age, 
of every rank, who have become great Saints in every 
state, and in all sort&of employments? Not only will 
the example of these Saints one day form our accusa- 
tion, we shall be ourselves our own condemnation. 
Whilst we attempt to excuse our tepidity, and our 
negligence, by alleging our age, our employments and 
our condition, it will be shown to us, that at the same 
age, in the same employments, and the same condition, 
we have suffered and laboured more for the world, than 
Almighty God required of us to labour in order to gain 
heaven. 

7. There is no one who would venture to say, or 
who would believe, that after spending ten years in 
the study of human sciences, he would think himself 
fortunate if he knew as much as he had learned in the 



Digitized by Google 



64 



SECOND PART. 



first six months after he began his studies. Yet we 
find persons who make profession of piety, persons 
whose chief employment is to become perfect, who, 
after ten and twenty years of study and practice in the 
sublime science of salvation, are not ashamed to say, 
and are not displeased if others believe, that they 
would think themselves very happy, if they were as 
fervent, as mortified and as holy, as they were after 
the first six months of their perfect conversion. It is 
true that they manage to stupify themselves, as it 
were, by exterior dissipation, and the insipid pleasures 
of a tepid life : but, sooner or later, they will arrive at 
the end of their life, and what sentiments will they 
have at the hour of death ? 

8. Are we well convinced of the great truths of our 
religion ? If we do not believe, we do too much. But 
if we believe, certainly we do too little. What is it 
that is at stake ? So much is said of the importance 
of salvation, of the value of the soul, of eternity. Is it 
true that I am in the world only in order to save 
my soul? that Jesus Christ became man only to 
show us that this is the only business of mankind, 
that it alone' deserves our application, alone demands 
our whole application, and depends on our applica- 
tion ? Is it true that if this affair succeeds ill all is 
lost? that to put oneself in danger of succeeding ill 
in this, is to risk all ; and that to live in tepidity, is to 
place ourselves in a kind of necessity of succeeding ill ? 
Is it true that this is the affair of eternity? Can 
Almighty God have been deceived in saying that all 
the rest is of no consequence ? Can He have employed 
His care and His providence without sufficient purpose, 
in referring all things to this one end ? Is God then 
of so little consequence, that it can be an indifferent 
matter to us whether we lose Him? Why so many 
tears, so many and such bitter regrets in hell, if the 
good, which the damned have lost, deserved so little 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTEB n. 



65 



effort to secure it ? Why shudder at the very thought 
of eternity, if it matters so little whether we be 
eternally unhappy ? But do we show any great appre- 
hension of this misfortune, if we take so little trouble 
to avoid it ? Are we taking much trouble if we con- 
tinue in the tepidity and indifference in which we 
live? 

9. If we were careful to make these reflections fre- 
quently, we should be ashamed to lead a tepid life, and 
to be so backward in God's service. We should soon 
take the resolution of loving Jesus Christ. But alas ! 
after we have made these reflections, and have been 
moved by them, the moment afterwards we seek to dis- 
tract ourselves, as if we were sorry to have made them, 
and to have been touched by them. " Compared to a 
man (says St. James ii. 28) beholding his own countenance 
in a glass. For he beheld himself, and went his way, and 
presently forgot what manner of man he was" 

II. Second Obstacle.—- Self-love. 
It is a most certain fact, that there are very few who 
do not act through self-love. All the difference that 
there is between spiritual persons and those who are 
not so is, that in the one, self-love acts without disguise, 
whilst in the others, it is less perceptible and more 
masked. Any one who would take the trouble to make 
a few reflections, on the true motives of the greater part 
of his actions, which appear the least defective, would 
discover numberless windings and turnings of a secret 
self-love which forms their principal motive and destroys 
all their fruit. We relish and approve of only such 
practices of virtue as we find easy. The specious pre- 
text of preserving our health, which we imagine to be 
so necessary for the glory of God, takes up our whole 
mind with a thousand little cares. We are careful of 
ourselves. Most kinds of mortification appear to us 
to be either indiscreet, or not suited to our age or our 

F 



Digitized by Google 



66 



SECOND PART. 



state. The thoughts and desires which God gives us, 
from time to time, of attending seriously to our perfec- 
tion, we treat as illusions. 

We wish to persuade ourselves that God does not 
require from us so high a sanctity, though He has 
granted us very great graces, or has placed us in a 
state that requires us to he great saints. We flatter 
ourselves that we have a true desire of leaving all 
things as soon as the will of God shall be manifested 
to us. In vain does God make Himself heard in the 
depth of our heart by His inspirations, in vain does He 
speak to us by means of a director or spiritual father, 
or by means of the reflections we make, of the lights 
we receive, of the examples we see, and which we our- 
selves are ready to praise. The voice of God is not 
recognized when it is opposed to self-love. The reason 
is, that it is not the will of God that we take as the rule 
of our life, but our inclination and self-love. We would 
fain make these the rule of the will of God. 

Whence comes it that there are some persons who 
are never more uneasy, more melancholy, more full of 
resentment, or ill-humoured, than when they are more 
recollected, and seem to be applying more particularly 
to their perfection ? It is because the lights they then 
receive in prayer, and the inspirations which God gives 
them, disturb them from their not being able to recon- 
cile them with the self-love that fills their minds. It 
seems as though they expected that the path of perfec- 
tion should present no difficulty, or that God should 
heap upon them sweetness and interior consolations 
before they have taken the first step in the way to per- 
fection. As the life of such persons seems well regu- 
lated, and their conduct irreproachable, they go on 
unhappily crawling and languishing during their whole 
life in this state, without ever correcting a single 
failing. 

It would be better for us, if we may say so, not to 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTEB n. 



67 



have certain virtues with the possession of which we 
comfort ourselves. We should at least acknowledge 
our indigence and misery. But the little virtue we 
possess serves only to render us daily more imperfect. 
We content ourselves with a composed exterior, a 
natural or affected modesty, an apparent virtue, which 
is rather the effect of education than of grace ; and as 
we see that we are secure from the reproaches which 
those whose lives are ill-regulated draw upon them- 
selves, we imagine that we have a great fund of virtue, 
because we do not allow many faults to appear. 

We form to ourselves a plan of devotion according to 
our humour, our natural inclination, and our caprice. 
We find many inexperienced or yielding directors who 
approve this system upon which our whole life turns, 
and thus we become insensible to the examples, the 
reflections, and the truths which move the greatest 
sinners. We need not wonder, if, being so full of self- 
love, we are always seeking our ease in trifles. We 
cannot bear to want anything, under the pretext that 
we are willing to leave all. If we deprive ourselves of 
anything, we generally do it in order that we may 
deceive ourselves by this pretended mortification, and 
enjoy in quiet many other things which are dearer to 
us, and of which we are unwilling to deprive ourselves. 
We mostly act either from nature or inclination. We 
feel tenderness only for those with whom we sympa- 
thise. We refuse nothing to our senses, and if we 
mortify them in anything, it is only in what gives us 
the least difficulty, or when such mortification does us 
honour. We are willing to do good works, but we wish 
to choose what we will do. Hence it follows that we 
feel nothing but disgust for the slightest obligations 
which our state imposes on us, whilst we find great 
attraction in more painful occupations, either because 
they are of our own choice, or because they put us under 
the necessity of exempting ourselves from the ordinary 



Digitized by Google 



68 



SECOND PABT. 



obligations of our state. We consider sickness in 
others as a visitation, and as a gift of God ; but, as 
soon as Almighty God grants us this gift, we become 
uneasy, melancholy, impatient, and anxious. It is not 
that sickness is the cause of this. But we show in 
sickness what we really are, because we have then no 
longer the motives or the means which health afforded 
us for disguising our self-love. 

From the same source, too, proceed those barren 
desires and chimerical projects which form the food of 
a spirit naturally proud, and which give nourishment 
to self-love. We propose to ourselves certain plans of 
life which we intend to carry out at certain times ; and, 
as if our conversion and sanctification were secure, we 
take no further trouble about correcting our imperfec- 
tions. Though we are convinced that mortification is 
absolutely necessary if we would be holy, we refuse the 
crosses that present themselves under the pretext that 
they are too small. We sigh after greater crosses, only 
because we see them at a greater distance. We satisfy 
ourselves in the meantime with these idle imaginations. 
We are at rest, confiding in this composed exterior, in 
these good works which please us, and in the practices 
of devotion in which we are most exact. We are in- 
toxicated, as it were, with the vain and insipid praises 
of those who flatter us. We are full of the idea of 
some virtue which we possess only in name. At length 
we find ourselves, at the close of a long life, devoid of 
merit, and often without any sentiment, more praise- 
worthy than a vain and barren desire of being then as 
virtuous as we were at the beginning of our conversion. 

Such are the effects of self-love, and few are exempt 
from it. We are to be pitied for nourishing within 
ourselves an enemy dangerous in proportion as he is 
crafty, and to be dreaded in proportion as we distrust 
him less. Now it is certain that Jesus Christ will 
never recognize as the true friends of His Heart those 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



69 



who love only their own ease, and who are so cautious 
about labouring for Him. This is what He has ex- 
pressly said in giving us the description of His true 
servants. In vain, says He, will any one flatter him- 
self that he is My disciple, because he has left for My 
love his goods, his parents, his friends, if he does not 
also renounce himself : adhuc autem et animam mam. 
We must do violence to ourselves, make war against 
our passions, stifle or at least mortify our self-love in 
everything, in order to he truly His disciples. There 
is no true love of Jesus Christ where there is no true 
mortification. 

III. Thibd Obstacle.— -4 Secret Pride. 

Secret pride is no less an obstacle to the love of 
Jesus Christ. It seems that there cannot be a greater 
obstacle to our perfection, and consequently to an ardent 
love of Jesus Christ, than the spirit of vanity, from which 
there are so very few who preserve themselves. Our 
other enemies we weaken and overcome by the practice 
of virtue ; whereas, it is in the very practice of virtue 
itself, that this enemy finds its strength. Our very 
victories are weapons which the devil makes use of, to 
vanquish us, by taking occasion from them to inspire 
us with pride. We may say, that of all vices, there is 
none that has kept so many souls back in the path of 
piety, or that has plunged so many from the highest 
perfection into tepidity, and even into sin. From this 
spirit of vanity proceed the inordinate desire that we 
have to be seen, and the excessive eagerness we feel to 
sticceed in all that we undertake. 

In vain do we torment ourselves, to assure ourselves 
that in all this we are seeking nothing but the glory of 
God. We have but to listen to our conscience, to be 
convinced that we seek nothing but our own glory. 
That excessive uneasiness which the fear of not suc- 
ceeding causes in us; that sadness and discouragement 



Digitized by Google 



70 



SECOND PART. 



we experience after a failure ; that joy and satisfaction 
we feel at the sight of the honours and praises we 
receive, are clear proofs of the spirit of vanity that 
urges us to act. 

This same spirit also mixes itself up with the 
practice of the highest virtues : we wish to he highly 
mortified, to he obliging, courteous, civil, charitable, 
and we may add, to give great edification to our neigh- 
bour, by appearing so. From the same source spring 
almost all our defects. We fill our minds insensibly 
with the idea of a pretended merit, which we do not 
possess, and which this idea alone would make us lose, 
did we really possess it. We love to recount our 
adventures. We have always some circumstance of 
our life ready, as an example of the subject on which 
we are speaking. One would say, that it is no longer 
any failing to praise ourselves continually, when we 
already bear a good reputation. We wish to possess 
the esteem and the hearts of all. Hence it is that we 
prefer to omit our obligations, rather than disoblige 
another ; and what is still more extraordinary, we try 
to cover this ambition and vanity by the specious pre- 
text of civility, charity, and condescension. We falsely 
persuade ourselves that we must act thus, in order to 
make virtue less difficult to others. We wish to please 
both God and men. By this means, we very often fail 
to please men, and we always displease God. 

From the same source spring that delicacy regarding 
the point of honour, those little coolnesses in friend- 
ship, those regrets which approach so nearly to envy, 
if they have not all its malignity; that secret pain 
which is caused by the success of others. We always 
find some accident to which the greater part of their 
good fortune is attributed. We try to lower them. 
We speak coldly of them. We consider anyone who 
speaks in their praise, either tiresome or a flatterer. 
Whence proceeds all this ? From our being filled with 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



71 



vanity and pride. We feel resentment at the least 
disagreeable word, or at the least sign of contempt. 
We think ourselves at liberty to omit certain acts of 
civility towards others ; but we do not pardon them, if 
they fail in what we consider due to us. By a still 
more ridiculous illusion, we imagine that we owe it to 
the honour of God, Whom we serve, and of that exalted 
virtue which we flatter ourselves we possess, to display 
before the world our spirit, our talents, our good quali- 
ties, natural and supernatural. If anyone after this 
does not show us all the esteem and veneration that we 
expected, this is enough to make us at once consider 
him as imperfect, or as one who has no regard for 
merit, or esteem for virtue. 

Nor are these yet all the effects of this secret ambi- 
tion. We love fame, applause and praise for all we do. 
We see some who labour much for God, but who are 
always saying how much they do. They are always 
uncomfortable, hurried, fatigued and oppressed; one 
would say that they are inviting everyone to have com- 
passion on them, in their labours. The truth is, that 
vanity has a great part in so much labour. We think 
ourselves very important and necessary ; and we wish 
to appear so. Pride comes in, even in the very actions 
that belong to humility. We love to distinguish our- 
selves in the practice of certain virtues, and even in 
the exercise of good works. But all this alacrity is not 
for God alone, it is also to secure our own distinction. 
Finally, that excessive sadness and discouragement 
which we feel after a relapse into our former failings, 
is not the effect of tenderness of conscience, as some 
imagine. It is the effect of a secret pride, which makes 
us think ourselves more holy than we really are. 

In a word, we pass for spiritual persons, we even 
think ourselves such, and yet we are influenced merely 
by human prudence, disguised under the name of good 
sense. We refer all to the rule of this pretended good 



Digitized by Google 



72 



SECOND PART. 



sense which we have framed for ourselves, in order 
that we may deceive ourselves without scruple. It is 
by this false rule that we judge even of spiritual things, 
of divine operations, and of the marvels of grace. We 
approve of nothing but what suits our ideas. The 
graces which God bestows either upon ourselves or 
others, we use according to the maxims of human pru- 
dence, and by an extraordinary blindness which is the 
chastisement of proud spirits, we think that we are 
following reason and good sense, the further we remove 
from the spirit of God. 

Are we astonished, then, with all this, that we have 
neither spiritual consolations nor sentiments of devo- 
tion, after ten or twenty years spent by us in the 
exercise of virtue and the practice of good works ? Do 
we lament that we make no progress, that we are 
always imperfect, that the use of the Sacraments is of 
little profit to us, that we do not know what sensible 
devotion is ? That secret pride which we nourish in 
the depth of our heart, dries up, as it were, the foun- 
tain of the greatest graces. It is this that causes 



spect, who have lived with so much honour, and have 
been proposed as the model of those who are called 
wealthy in the world — viri divitiarum, and who, from 
appearances, ought to be loaded with spiritual riches, 
to find themselves at death with their hands empty 
of good works. This self-love, this little ambition, this 
secret pride, have robbed them of all, and corrupted 
everything. This is the worm that withers the loftiest 
oaks ; this is the leaven that, sooner or later, corrupts 
the whole mass, or at least inflates it, and fills it 
with nothing but wind. 

It is evident that the love of Jesus Christ cannot 
exist at the same time with a vice so opposed to it. 
How can our blessed Saviour, who would have the first 
of the beatitudes, the foundation of the spiritual life, 



persons so wise 




jgular, so circum- 



Digitized by 



Google 



CHAPTER II. 



73 



and the first step to be taken in the path of virtue, to 
be that spirit of humility which He Himself has chosen, 
in preference to all the other virtues as His own special 
characteristic ; — how can He be greatly loved by those 
who so little resemble Him ? This sincere humility of 
mind and heart is the distinctive character of Jesus 
Christ. It is impossible, then, to be animated by His 
spirit, and to dwell in His Heart, unless we are truly 
animated by this spirit of humility. > 

IV. Fourth Obstacle.— ^ Some Unmortified Passion. 

The fourth obstacle, and the fourth source of those 
defects which hinder and destroy the love of Jesus 
Christ, and consequently the devotion to His Sacred 
Heart, are certain unmortified passions to which we are 
attached, and which, sooner or later, are the fatal cause 
of some great misfortune. 

The greater number of persons who wish to give 
themselves to God, and who consequently declare a 
mortal war against all vices, proceed in this war some- 
thing in the same way as Saul did, in the war he 
undertook by the order of God against Amalech — Vade, 
percute Amalech, et demolire universa ejus ; non parcas ei, 
et non concupiscas ex rebus ipsius aliquid. Now, therefore, 
go and smite Amalech, and utterly destroy all that he hath ; 
spare him not, nor covet anything that is his (1 Kings xv. 
3). Almighty God had ordered Saul to exterminate all 
the Amalekites, and destroy whatever belonged to 
them, without sparing anything. Saul exterminated 
the people, but, moved with compassion, he pardoned 
the king, and reserved for sacrifice whatever he found 
most precious on the field : et pepercit Saul Agag . . . 
et universis quapulchra erant, nec voluerunt disperdere ea ; 
quidquid vero vile fuit et reprobum, hoc demoliti sunt. 
And Saul spared Agag . . . and all that was beautiful, 
and would not destroy them, but everything that was vile 
and good for nothing, that they destroyed. The Lord hath 



Digitized by Google 



74 



SECOND PAET. 



rejected thee from being king. But this disobedience cost 
Saul his kingdom, and was the cause of his reprobation 
and ruin : abjecit te Dominus ne sis Bex. 

Many follow the example of Saul in the war they 
undertake against their vices. May God preserve 
them from a similar fate. We are well convinced that 
God wills that we should make a sacrifice to Him of 
all our passions, and that He cannot endure that we 
should spare any vice. But we consent to this only in 
appearance. We destroy, so to speak, all our enemies, 
but there is some predominant passion that we spare. 
There is always something particularly dear and precious 
that we do not touch. That we may deceive ourselves 
without scruple, we leave a place in our heart always 
with some good motive, for one of our enemies. We 
extinguish in ourselves the spirit of the world, but we 
like to see it still living in its followers. We dress 
ourselves with all modesty, but we wish a daughter to 
be attired in the extreme of unchristian fashions. We 
do not gamble, but we are recklessly extravagant in the 
entertainments which we give. We moderate our im- 
petuosity and our anger, but we spare a secret ambition 
and some secret jealousy which we cannot resolve to 
overcome. We mortify that constant dissipation which 
is so unbecoming in persons who make profession of 
loving Jesus Christ in a special manner, but we will not 
deprive ourselves of the liberty of spending whole hours 
in visits and useless conversations. Under the pretence 
that we must make ourselves agreeable to all, to gain 
all to Jesus Christ, and that we must make virtue easy, 
sweet, and amiable, we insensibly get into the habit of 
doing everything just like others, and reserve only the 
name and appearance of virtue. 

Others, a little more generous, break the strongest 
links that kept them attached to the world. They 
leave their parents and their property. They even give 
up their liberty in a certain way, and submit to the yoke 
of religious obedience. But they do not take pains to 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTEE II. 



75 



break the smaller links, that is to say, to free them- 
selves from a variety of little affections, which fail not 
to stop them, and retard their progress in the way of 
perfection. What does it matter, that the fetters which 
keep us bound to creatures are slight, if there are 
many of them ? A single chain, however small, suffices 
to hinder us from advancing a single step when we will 
not break it. 

Finally, there are some who are generous enough to 
resolve to overcome all. They even make some efforts 
to do so. But they do not touch their natural disposi- 
tion or that failing which suits their inclinations best. 
This one enemy left unconquered, this single passion 
not mortified, this single chain unbroken, makes them 
go on creeping all their lives, and hinders them from 
arriving at the high perfection to which they were 
called — pro eo ergo abjeczt te Dominua ne sis "Rex. The 
Lord hath rejected thee from being king. A small opening 
is enough to destroy a ship, and to bring to ruin in 
course of time the most splendid edifice. A spark 
suffices to cause a great conflagration. Death is often 
the consequence of a trifling sickness neglected. A 
single ill drawn stroke of the pencil is enough to dis- 
credit a picture, otherwise well executed. 

We are surprised sometimes to see persons who have 
grown old in exercises of piety, men of consummate 
spirituality and highly mortified, who still retain very 
great imperfections which they themselves condemn in 
others, and of which, however, they never correct them- 
selves. This arises from their familiarising themselves, 
as it were, with their own failings. They have spared 
them from their youth ; they allow their natural dispo- 
sition to act. They easily become impatient ; they con- 
tinually praise themselves always with some good 
motive, and under some grand pretext. They neglect 
to become perfect when they are young, and they, find 
themselves most imperfect when they are old. 



Digitized by Google 



76 



8EC0ND PART. 



Such are the great obstacles to the love of Jesus 
Christ, and consequently to the devotion to His Sacred 
Heart. Such are the sources of the many imperfec- 
tions that are noticed in persons who seem the most 
spiritual ; imperfections, however, which do great in- 
jury to true piety, by the false idea they give of devotion. 
True piety always condemns these defects. The true 
love of Jesus Christ cannot exist together with these 
imperfections, this secret pride, this self-love. The 
effects of these three fatal sources are not to be found 
in those who possess this true love. And yet, without 
this pure and true love of Jesus Christ, there is no 
solid devotion, no perfect virtue. 

" My God ! " exclaimed a great servant of God, 
" what confusion and disorder is this ? At one time 
we are cheerful, at another sad ; to-day we are kind to 
every one, to-morrow we are like a hedge-hog, that no 
one can touch without being pricked." This is a clear 
proof of a want of virtue. It is a sign that nature 
still reigns in us, that our passions are not mortified. 
A truly virtuous man is always the same. Is there no 
danger, if we sometimes do good, of our doing it rather 
through humour than from virtue ? 

CHAPTER nr. 

The means of overcoming the obstacles, that hinder us from 
gathering the fruit we ought, from the devotion to the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ. 

It is certain that tepidity, self-love, secret pride, or any 
other passion that we have not taken care to mortify, 
are the chief springs of our imperfections, and the 
greatest obstacles to our gathering the fruit we ought, 
from the devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ. 
We have only a weak and languishing charity. We 
cherish within us our most formidable enemies. With- 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER in. 



77 



out us are the devil -who tempts us, the world which 
attracts us, objects which dazzle us, occasions which 
surround us, examples which draw us away. If, then, 
we are not always on our guard, and do not keep the 
doors of our senses closed against all these enemies 
who besiege us, they will speedily make themselves 
masters of our heart. " It is extraordinary," says a 
great servant of God, " how many enemies we have to 
fight against. From the moment we form the resolu- 
tion of becoming saints, they seem to be all let loose : 
the devil with his artifices, nature with the resistance 
it makes to our good desires, the praises of the good, 
the scoffs of the wicked, the solicitations of the tepid, 
the example of those who pass for devout, but are not 
so. If God visit us, we have to fear vanity; if He 
withdraw Himself, timidity. Discouragement may 
succeed the greatest fervour. Our friends tempt us 
by means of the condescension which we show towards 
them : the indifferent by the fear we have of dis- 
pleasing them. Indiscretion is to be feared in fervour, 
sensuality in moderation, and self-love in everything. 
What then are we to do ? For sanctity does not consist 
in being faithful for a day or a year, but in persevering 
and advancing until death. We must make use of 
those means which all the Saints, together with Jesus 
Christ Himself, assure us to be most suitable for 
weakening and destroying that self-love and secret 
pride which are the source of all these impediments. 
These means are mortification and humility. We must 
resolve on one of two things, either never to have a 
perfect love for Jesus Christ, or to be truly humble and 
perfectly mortified. 

I. First Means.-— True Mortification. 

Mortification is so necessary for the perfect love of 
Jesus Christ, that it is the first lesson that Jesus 
Christ Himself gives to those who wish to be His 



Digitized by Google 



78 



SECOND PABT. 



disciples. Without it, we can have no hope of ever 
being disciples of Jesus Christ. If any man will come 
after Me, says our loving Saviour, let him deny himself, 
take up hie cross, and follow Me ; and whosoever doth not 
carry his cross, and hate his own life, cannot be My dis- 
ciple, and is not worthy of Me. For this reason all the 
Saints agree in considering that there is no stronger 
proof of real piety than perfect mortification. Is he a 
very mortified person ? asked St. Ignatius, when the 
virtue of some one was praised by others. He would 
give them to understand that true mortification is in- 
separable from true piety, not only because no virtue 
can long exist without constant and general mortifica- 
tion, but also, because, without mortification, there is no 
such thing as true virtue. 

There are two sorts of mortifications : one exterior, 
which consists in the maceration of the body ; the 
other interior, which is properly the mortification of 
the mind and heart. Both are necessary for attaining 
perfection. One cannot exist long without the other. 
Fasts, watchings, hair-shirts, and other bodily mortifi- 
cations are powerful means to become truly spiritual 
and truly perfect ; and when they are used with discre- 
tion, help marvellously to strengthen nature, always 
weak for good and prone to evil ; to repress the assaults 
and escape the snares of our common enemy, and finally 
to obtain from the Father of mercies, the helps that are 
necessary for all the just, and especially for beginners. 

It is true that sanctity does not consist in exterior 
penances, and that they are not incompatible with 
hypocrisy. But it is not so with interior mortification. 
This is always a mark of true piety. It is, therefore, 
still more necessary than exterior mortification, and no 
one can reasonably abstain from it. We must do our- 
selves this violence continually, in order to gain heaven. 
All are not able to fast, or to wear a hair-shirt, but there 
is no one who cannot be silent, at a time when passion 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER in. 



79 



moves him to answer, or vanity to speak. There is no 
one who cannot mortify his natural disposition, his 
desires, his passions. It is in this that interior mor- 
tification chiefly consists. By it we weaken our self- 
love, reduce it to reason, and free ourselves from our 
imperfections. It is in vain that we flatter ourselves 
we love Jesus Christ, if we are not mortified. All 
the sublimest sentiments of piety, all the practices 
of devotion are to be suspected, if not accompanied by 
this perfect mortification. We wonder to see ourselves 
so imperfect, and after so many practices of piety, so 
many communions, to feel the various passions that 
continually agitate our heart. Do we not see that it is 
the want of perfect mortification which is the source of 
all these disorders ? It is necessary, then, if we would 
weaken and destroy this self-love, by which all the pas- 
sions are fed, to resolve upon generous and constant 
mortification. 

It is not enough to mortify ourselves for a certain 
time, and in some things. We must, if possible, mor- 
tify ourselves in all things and at all times, though 
with prudence and discretion. A single irregular grati- 
fication which you allow to nature has more effect in 
making her haughty and rebellious, than a hundred 
victories that you may have gained over her will have 
in weakening her. A truce with enemies of this kind 
is a victory for them. My brethren, says St. Bernard, 
what is lopped off, sprouts again ; what is extinguished, 
rekindles ; what is slumbering, wakes up again. To 
preserve the interior spirit of devotion we must pre- 
vent our soul from diffusing itself abroad. We must 
surround it on all sides, as the Prophet says, with a 
hedge of thorns. Now this we neglect to do; and 
hence our tepidity, our relaxation, and all our indevo- 
tion. If we mortify nature in one thing, we imme- 
diately repay it by some other satisfaction which we 
allow it. If we are recollected in a retreat, as soon as 



Digitized by Google 



80 



SECOND FABT. 



it is over, we open all the doors of our senses to objects 
that will dissipate us. The exercise of this interior 
mortification, so habitual to all the Saints, is familiar 
to all those who have a true desire of perfection. We 
have but to attend to the suggestions of the Spirit of 
God. The love of Jesus Christ is so ingenious on this 
point, that the diligence and the methods of mortifica- 
tion, with which it at once inspires the most ignorant 
persons, surpass the ideas of the most learned, and 
may almost be called miraculous. There is nothing 
that does not afford them an opportunity of mortifying 
their natural inclinations. There is no time, or place, 
that does not seem suited to mortify themselves, with- 
out ever departing from the rules of real good sense. 
It suffices that they have a great wish to see or to 
speak, to oblige them to cast down their eyes, and be 
silent. The desire to hear news, or to know all that 
happens, is to them a constant motive for mortification. 
This mortification is the more meritorious in propor- 
tion, as it is less extraordinary, and has God for its 
sole witness. A happy remark, a witty pleasantry, 
may do us honour in society, but it may also form 
the subject of a pleasing sacrifice. There is scarcely 
an hour of the day which does not offer some op- 
portunity of mortification. Whether we are sitting 
or standing, we can easily find a less comfortable 
place or position, without anything appearing exte- 
riorily. If we are repeatedly interrupted in some very 
serious occupation, we can reply as often with as 
much mildness and civility as if we had not been 
occupied at all. The patience of a person of solid 
virtue, may find great exercise in the ill-temper of 
any one about him ; the imperfections of a servant, or 
the ingratitude of one who is under obligations 
to him. Finally, inconveniences of place, season, or 
persons, borne in such a manner, as if we did not 
perceive them, are, it is true, small opportunities of 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER III. 



81 



fying ourselves — but mortification in these little things 
is no little matter. It is of great merit; and it 
may be said that the greatest graces, and the most 
exalted sanctity, depend generally on the generosity 
which we show in mortifying ourselves in these little 
things. It is not a small mortification to omit none 
of the duties of a community, and to conform oneself 
in all things to community life, without having any 
regard to our own inclinations, our employments, or 
age. This kind of mortification is the more valuable 
in proportion, as it is less exposed to vanity, and more 
conformable to the spirit of Jesus Christ. 

But if we did not find in external things so many 
occasions for mortifying ourselves, they are always to 
be found within ourselves. We cannot be for a long 
time modest, recollected, reserved, without great mor- 
tication. Honesty, meekness and civility may be the 
effect of education, but they are generally the marks of 
one who is habitually mortified. Without this virtue 
how can we be in peace, and always the same, do 
always perfectly what we do, and be always content 
with what God wills ? 

II. — Second Means.— Sincere Humility. 

The second means is sincere humility. Jesus Christ, 
says St. Augustin, does not say to us, learn of Me to 
work miracles, but learn of Me, because I am meek 
and humble of heart, to give us to understand, that, 
without humility, there is no true piety. We are 
sufficiently convinced of the necessity of this virtue ; 
all the difficulty consists in knowing what is true 
humility. Many think they are truly humble, as soon 
as they have a low opinion of themselves. But they 
deceive themselves, if they are not at the same time 
well pleased, that others should entertain the same 
opinion of them. It is not enough that we acknow- 
ledge ourselves to possess no virtue or merit. We 

o 



Digitized by Google 



82 



SECOND PART. 



must believe it. We must be pleased that others 
believe it. The first step to be taken in gaining this 
virtue, is to beg it earnestly of God. The next is 
firmly to convince ourselves, by means of serious and 
frequent reflection on ourselves, of our poverty and our 
own imperfections. The remembrance of what we 
have been, and the thought of what we may be, serve 
greatly to humble us. The truly virtuous think little 
of others, and occupy themselves solely with their own 
imperfections. The truly humble are scandalized at 
nothing, because they know their own weakness so 
well. They see themselves so near the precipice, and 
they are so much afraid of falling, that they are not 
surprised if others fall. The less we speak of ourselves, 
the more closely we conform ourselves to true humility. 
Those affected discourses, by which we wish to make 
it appear that we have little esteem for ourselves, have 
no effect usually but to gain us praise. The most 
certain mark of sincere humility is to have a special 
love for those who despise us : never to avoid any 
humiliations that present themselves to us; not to 
take pleasure in vain thoughts and vain projects for 
the future, which only serve to nourish a secret pride 
within us; never to speak to our own advantage; 
never to complain and not to allow others to complain 
of anything Almighty God allows to happen to us ; to 
excuse the failings of our neighbour; never to be 
troubled at our own relapses ; to defer to others in all 
things .; never to undertake anything but with diffidence 
in ourselves, and to have little esteem for what we do. 
Finally, to pray much, and to speak little. 

Any one who is convinced that he is very miserable, 
is not offended if he is despised : he sees that it is only 
just. A humble man, whatever bad treatment he may 
receive, thinks that justice is done him. Men do not 
esteem me ; they are right, they agree in this with God, 
and with the Angels. Whoever has deserved hell, 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER III. 



83 



thinks that contempt is his due. It is not meant by 
this, that we are obliged to receive a humiliation with 
sensible pleasure. Contempt is naturally disagreeable. 
But not to complain, to be silent under contempt, to 
thank God for it, and to pray to Him for those whom 
He makes use of to humble us, whatever repugnance 
nature may feel in submitting, are certain marks of 
sincere humility, without which there is no virtue. 
We have enemies, say a St. Paul, within and without 
us, who spread snares for us on every side. The love 
of humility, of abjection, of a hidden and obscure life, 
is a powerful remedy against so many evils. There is 
no peace but in the forgetfulness of ourselves. If we 
wish to become perfect, we must resolve to forget even 
our own spiritual interests, and to seek only the pure 
glory of God. 

III. Third Means. — The joy and true sweetness which are 
inseparable from the exercise of true mortification and of 
sincere humility. 

There is no devotion, without universal, generous, 
and constant mortification. There is none without 
sincere humility. But is it possible to speak of humi- 
lity and continual mortification, without terrifying per- 
sons who perhaps have some desire to gain an ardent 
love of Jesus Christ? Do they not immediately tremble 
at the thought of so uncomfortable a condition ? 

Who can look upon a life full of crosses, without 
feeling horror? To thwart our natural inclinations in 
everything, to deny our senses every satisfaction that 
is not absolutely necessary, to live in retirement and 
silence, without seeking the esteem of men, taking 
pleasure in their praises, or feeling regret at their con- 
tempt, — is not this, we may say, to lead a very unhappy 
life ? All, however, who live in this manner, declare 
that they are perfectly happy. The world says that 
this kind of life is insupportable ; but Jesus Christ 

q 2 



Digitized by Google 



84 



SECOND PART. 



Himself says that it is sweet and easy, full of joy and 
consolation. The world — that is to say, those who 
know nothing ahout this life — say one thing ; and all 
who have experienced it, say quite the contrary. St. 
Francis of Sales calls this sort of life the sweetness of 
sweetnesses. St. Ephrem, whilst practising a most 
mortified life, cried out, full of consolation, " It is 
enough, my God, it is enough ! Do not load me with 
Thy benefits. Moderate Thy liberality, if Thou wouldst 
not have me die, for the ineffable sweetness which I 
taste in Thy service is enough to cause my death/' " I 
am in a country," says St. Francis Xavier, writing 
from Japan to his brethren in Europe, " where I am in 
want of all the conveniences of life. But nevertheless, 
I feel so much interior consolation, that there is danger 
of my losing my sight through weeping with joy." 
Can so many thousands of Saints, whom we acknow- 
ledge to have been so wise and so sincere, have agreed 
to say exactly opposite to what they thought and ex- 
perienced ? 

But if we are so unhappy, as worldly persons think, 
in this exercise of continual mortification, how is it 
that those we see to be most mortified are always the 
most contented ? How is it that we find no persons 
on earth perfectly contented, perfectly happy, but those 
who are most mortified ? If this mortified life does not 
itself produce this unalterable joy, by what artifice do 
these persons preserve themselves until death, in a 
sweetness and tranquillity which no misfortune of life 
can ever disturb ? If they merely feign it, how is it 
that persons of the world, who know so well the art of 
dissimulation, have never as yet been able to conceal 
their uneasiness and their regrets, though they pass 
the greater part of their life in pleasure and amuse- 
ment? Virtue alone, says St. Augustan, though it 
seems austere, gives true pleasure. There is no perfect 
felicity in this world, except for virtuous persons, wb.9 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER III. 



85 



seriously labour at their sanctification. Exempt as 
they are from the disturbance of those cruel passions 
which tyrannise over the wicked, they experience more 
sweetness in their life, and less regret. Perfectly sub- 
missive to God's will, they enjoy a calm and profound 
peace which the world cannot give. This sweet tran- 
quillity of conscience is the ordinary result of virtue. 
The more we belong to God, the more do we enjoy it. 
The more we keep back from God, the less do we 
participate in this sweetness. 

What might we not say of the secret unction by 
which Almighty God lightens the yoke of His law ; of 
those happy moments in which He makes Himself 
heard by just souls ; of that sweet hope, which makes 
them feel in anticipation the joys of heaven ; of those 
rays of light, which show them so clearly the vanity of 
the world ; of those tears of consolation, which they 
sometimes shed at the foot of the crucifix, when they 
experience a purer and more exquisite joy than the 
most delightful pleasures of the world can afford ? 
This joy and this interior sweetness, which surpasses 
all imagination, is a hidden mystery to tepid souls. It 
is for them an unknown language. But give me, says 
St. Augustin, a fervent soul, one truly humble and 
mortified, a heart full of the love of Jesus Christ ; such 
a one will understand what I say. " Dcl o/nuintem et 
sentiet quod dico" It is true, that to be perfect, it is 
not necessary to be altogether insensible to the mis- 
fortunes of life. Disasters may cause some agitation to 
the just, but they do not overpower him. He has 
always in his virtues a strong rock of support. In the 
broad way in which the imperfect walk, even though it 
had no crosses of its own, everything would contribute 
to raise them up around. Whereas, in the path followed 
by those who have an ardent love of Jesus Christ, 
whatever crosses there are, heaven and earth conspire, 
as it were, to sweeten them. The Son of God Himself 



Digitized by Google 



86 



SECOND PART. 



carries them with us, to lighten their weight. Finally, 
the mere thought of death is enough of itself to alarm 
the happiest worldlings, whereas it serves but to con- 
sole and rejoice the virtuous. Was there ever anyone 
at the point of death, at that moment when so correct 
a judgment is formed of everything, who was sorry for 
having practised mortification, or for having led a 
perfect life ? Or rather, is there anyone, on the con- 
trary, who has not felt a deep regret for not having 
done so ? 

Perfect mortification must assuredly have charms 
that we know not, because we are not perfectly mor- 
tified. Our weakness lets us do only enough to feel 
the difficulty, but not enough to taste the sweetness. 
It seems as though we mistrusted what is told us by 
the virtuous, and what Jesus Christ Himself promises 
us. We would have Him pay us in advance. We 
forget that in this, it is only the first step that is 
difficult. All the difficulty lies in resolving to mortify 
ourselves. Taste, says the Prophet, and see. In this 
matter, the eye is deceived; we must judge by the 
taste alone. Those who had seen the land of promise 
only from afar, were frightened, and said that it de- 
voured its inhabitants. But those who had been there, 
said quite the contrary, and declared that it was a land 
flowing with milk and honey. Let us make this perfect 
sacrifice for a fortnight, at least. A thing must be 
indeed of little value, if it is not worth the trial. If, 
after a fortnight of continual and perfect mortification, 
we do not taste that sweetness which others experience, 
I am content, said a great servant of God, that it 
should be said, that the life of those who truly love 
Jesus Christ is irksome, and that the yoke of our Lord 
is heavy. 

Is it not strange, that men should require so much 
to convince them that they can be happy in the exercise 
of constant mortification, when they see daily so many 



Digitized by Google 



GHAPTEB in. 



87 



persons pensive and uneasy amidst the greatest dissi- 
pation ? If there are sufferings which are unseen, is it 
impossible that there should he a hidden sweetness ? 
There is such, certainly, and it depends on ourselves 
to experience it 

Fr. la Colombiere had made a vow, with the leave of 
his superiors, to observe all his rules, and he had bound 
himself in particular to a continual mortification in all 
things. What will those to whom the three essential 
vows of religion seem an insupportable burden, think 
of this great servant of God ? Would they not consider 
him unhappy ? But see what he himself has written 
in his Spiritual Retreats, in which, as is commonly the 
practice of persons of solid virtue, who are resolved on 
making constant progress in the way of perfection, he 
has noted the sentiments given him by God, and the 
graces which He granted him, in order to remind him- 
self to thank Him for them, and to encourage himself 
to love Him more every day. 

" On the sixth day," he says, " making a considera- 
tion on the particular vow I have made, I was filled 
with gratitude to God, who has granted me the grace 
to make this vow. I had never had time to consider it 
thoroughly. I felt great joy in seeing myself bound 
thus by a thousand chains to do the will of God. The 
thought of this obligation is so far from alarming me, 
that it fills me with joy. It seems to me, that, in place 
of being a slave, I have entered into the kingdom of 
liberty and peace." 

" When I am quite alone," he says elsewhere, " I 
feel, by the infinite mercy of God, a liberty of heart 
that causes me incomparable joy. I feel myself at- 
tached to nothing, at least at the time. This does not 
hinder me from feeling every day the emotions of almost 
all the passions. But a moment's reflection serves to 
calm them. 

"I have often felt great interior joy in the thought 



Digitized by Google 



88 



SECOND PART. 



that I was in God's service. I have felt that this was 
worth more than all the favour of kings. The occupa- 
tions of worldly persons appeared to me most contemp- 
tible, compared with what is done for God. I feel 
myself exalted above all the kings of the earth by the 
honour of belonging to God. 

" I feel continually a greater desire to apply to the 
observance of my rules. I feel the greatest delight in 
practising them. The more exact I am in them, the 
more I seem to enter into perfect liberty. It is certain 
that this does not cause me any uneasiness. On the 
contrary, this yoke makes me, as it were, much lighter. 
I look on this as the greatest grace I have ever received 
in my life." 

It cannot be doubted that this great servant of God 
practised continual mortification in all things after 
making an express vow to do so. Thus he was seen 
in his last illness, when his infirmity would allow him 
to leave his bed, passing many hours of the day on a 
seat without any kind of support, persevering in this 
manner until death in the practice of universal morti- 
fication. This mortified life filled him with such con- 
solation and so great interior joy. that he confesses that 
it may indeed be felt, but cannot possibly be described, 

" The sight of Jesus Christ," he says, " makes the 
cross so pleasant to me, that it seems as if I could not 
be happy without it. I look with respect on those 
whom God visits with humiliations and adversities, of 
what kind soever they be. They are without doubt 
His favourites. To humble myself I have only to 
compare myself with them whilst I am in prosperity." 

" The following words," he continues, " never come 
into my mind, but light, peace, liberty, meekness, and 
love enter in, as it seems to me, at the same time with 
them : ' Simplicity,' ' confidence/ ' humility/ ' self- 
abandonment,' ' absence of all reserve/ 1 the will of 
God/ < my rules.' " 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



89 



The experience of this great servant of God shows 
us, that not only have the Saints who have preceded 
us found so much sweetness in the exercise of universal 
and constant mortification, but that even those with 
whom we live experience the same, as soon as they 
have the generosity to mortify themselves continually. 



CHAPTER IV. 

The particular means of acquiring this perfect love of Jesus 
Christ, and this tender devotion to His Sacred Heart. 

First Means.— Prayer. 

Besides the obstacles that we must avoid, and the dis- 
positions in which we must find ourselves, in order to 
acquire this perfect love of Jesus Christ, and this tender 
devotion to His Sacred Heart, it is well to suggest here 
the means that are most appropriate for this end. 

Now, the first means to obtain this ardent love of 
Jesus Christ, and this tender devotion to His Sacred 
Heart, is Prayer. We may well wonder that Christians 
are not, as it were, all powerful ; that they have not all 
they desire, since they have an infallible means of 
obtaining all they ask, and this means consists only in 
asking. 

There is nothing to which Jesus Christ has so 
solemnly and so repeatedly bound Himself as to hear 
our prayers. But of all prayers there can be none more 
pleasing to Him than that by which we ask Him for 
His love. He has strictly bound Himself to grant this 
love to all who should ask Him for it. But we may add, 
that even though He had not engaged Himself to it, the 
request itself would oblige Him to it. 

Jesus Christ has done all that we can imagine, nay 
more, to oblige us to love Him. It rests with Him to 
give us this love. Who will dare believe that He will 



Digitized by Google 



00 



SECOND PAET. 



refuse it to us if we ask Him for it ? But our esteem 
for this love must be indeed small, since we trouble 
ourselves so little about it, and ask for it so seldom. 
You wonder that you have not an ardent love for Jesus 
Christ, though this love is so just and so conformable 
to reason. There would be greater reason for astonish- 
ment if you did love Him, seeing that this love is the 
greatest of all His gifts, and that yet you do not even 
condescend to ask it. Of all the means of obtaining 
the love of Jesus Christ, there is none more efficacious 
than prayer. There is none more easy. For who can 
excuse himself from praying ? Still there is none, as 
it appears, that is more neglected. It might be said, 
that the most powerful motive by which Jesus Christ 
seeks to oblige us to make use of this means keeps us 
from it. Credits, quia accipietis. Be sure that you will 
be heard. But, my God, is not this the very thing 
that is dreaded ? " Timebam, ne me cito exaudires." 
" I was afraid that you would hear my prayer too soon" 
(St* Aug. Confess., book i.). We fear, unhappy as we 
are, that didst Thou but once hear us, Thy love would 
induce us to become more virtuous, more recollected, 
more devout, and more holy than we wish to be. We 
fear that if we had an ardent love for Thee, we should 
feel nothing but disgust for all that we have loved, and 
that we still love. In a word, we seem to fear that we 
shall not be able to help loving Thee. But regard not, 
oh my Saviour, these sentiments that arise within us, 
and which we detest as soon as we perceive them. 
Give us only Thy love with thy grace, and we shall be 
rich enough. How soon shall we, disgusted with every- 
thing else, if, opening to us Thy Sacred Heart, Thou 
allowest us but once to taste the sweetness that is ex- 
perienced in loving Thee. Let us pray and often ask 



and constantly without obtaining it. We fear, perhaps, 
to be importunate or excessive in our requests, to offend 



for this love. It i 




possible to ask for it earnestly 



Digitized by 



Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



01 



Jesus Christ by our indiscretion or our importunity. 
But, on the contrary, the reason why we obtain so little 
from God is because we do not ask much. We are 
too limited in our desires, and too languid in our 
prayers. Jesus Christ has given us in the Gospel the 
parable of the man, who obtained what he asked, merely 
by his importunity, in order to teach us that, if we wish 
to obtain what we ask, we must become importunate. 
We obtain little, because we ask too little, and because 
we do not beg earnestly for the little we ask for. We 
must ask Him for nothing less than His love ; but 
it must be a tender, ardent, generous, and perfect love, 
and we must ask for it earnestly and with importunity. 
As He has so solemnly engaged Himself to refuse us 
nothing that we ask in His Name, He cannot refuse to 
hear us without breaking His promise. Most frequently 
we do not know what we ask. But we should do an 
injury to Jesus Christ, and falsify our own belief, if, 
when we ask Him for His love, we were to doubt His 
hearing us, more especially if we ask it with earnest- 
ness and sincerity. I believe, indeed, that Jesus Christ, 
to punish us, or to humble us, and in any case to in. 
crease our merit, will leave us certain defects and im* 
perfections, from which we entreat Him to deliver us. 
But no one will ever persuade me that, after we have 
asked Him sincerely and earnestly for an ardent love of 
Him, He will refuse it to us. On the contrary, He will 
grant us more than we asked. Thou hast brought this 
divine fire on earth, oh Lord, and what dost Thou desire 
but that it be enkindled ? Ignem veni mittere in teiram, 
et quid voh, nisi ut accendatur ? (Luke xii.) With whom 
does it rest wholly to inflame me with it ? Give me* 
then, if it please Thee, give me Thy love* oh Lord. 
This shall be in future my constant prayer. I will 
make it morning and night, when at rest and when 
at work. I will make it every hour, and will never 
cease to say : Give me but Thy love, oh Lord, 



Digitized by Google 



92 



SECOND PART. 



with Tiiy grace, and I am rich enough ; I ask no 
more. 

II. Second Means. — Frequent Communion. 

The second means is the frequent use of the Sacra- 
ments, and frequent Communion. It is enough to know 
what Holy Communion is, to understand that there is 
no more certain means of becoming inflamed with love 
for Jesus Christ than to communicate frequently. It is 
not possible, says the Wise Man, to carry fire in one's 
bosom, and not be set on fire by it. Divine love has 
enkindled a furnace, so to speak, on our Altars in the 
adorable Eucharist. It is by approaching to this sacred 
fire that all the Saints have been inflamed with a most 
ardent and tender love for Jesus Christ. The love 
which burned within them after Communion appeared 
even in their countenance. How often have they been 
forced, in the depth of winter, to seek the cool air in 
order to moderate the ardour of divine love? The 
name or the picture of Jesus Christ was enough to 
make them fall into raptures and ecstacies. It cannot 
be doubted that the great love which the first faithful 
had for Jesus Christ was the effect of Holy Com- 
munion, which they received daily. All who render 
themselves worthy, by the innocence of their life and 
the exercise of true piety, to communicate frequently, 
experience still every day, in this point, the admirable 
effects of frequent Communion. They love Jesus Christ 
more and more. Their love increases in proportion as 
they nourish themselves more frequently with this 
Bread of Angels. So far are they from becoming dis- 
gusted with the frequent use of it, that, on the con- 
trary, their hunger sensibly increases, as the love they 
have for Jesus Christ grows more ardent. 

All the other Sacraments are effects of the love 
which the Son of God has for men. There is not one 
that is not capable of instilling into our hearts a true 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



93 



love for our divine Saviour. But the Sacrament of 
the Altar, says St. Bernard, is the love of loves. 
Sacramentum Altaris est amor amorum. It is the 
effect of the greatest love, that Jesus Christ can have 
for man; and at the same time, the most fruitful 
source of the tender and ardent love that men ought to 
have for Jesus Christ. Everything in this mystery 
contributes to inspire and increase this ardent love: 
the gift, the manner of giving it, and the end for which 
it is given. Jesus Christ gives us therein His adorable 
Body, and His precious Blood, to be our food. What 
shall have power to light up this divine fire in the 
hearts of men, if this heavenly food cannot do it? 
But the loving manner in which Jesus Christ makes 
us this gift obliges us less powerfully to love Him. 
Our Divine Saviour, the expected of the people of 
Israel, the desired of nations, the desire of the eternal 
hills, allowed His coming into the world to be wished 
for, for so many thousand years. But here He Him- 
self asks men, entreats of them, and even does violence 
to them to make them receive Him. Oblige them, 
says He, in the Gospel, oblige them to partake of the 
banquet that I have prepared for them : compeUe intrare. 
Love is impatient. It is an enemy of delay. It does 
not know what it is to hesitate or to be cautious. 
What has our loving Saviour in view, in so much 
earnestness? He desires to be loved by men. He 
gives them His Body and Blood to gain their hearts. 
He makes Himself their food only to gain possession 
of their heart, to rob them of it, without their being, 
so to say, able to prevent it. The chief intention you 
should have in communicating, says St. Francis of 
Sales (Introduction to a Devout Life, part ii. ch. 2), 
should be to increase and strengthen yourself in the 
love of God, for you ought to receive through love what 
love alone gives you. " Nowhere," continues this 
great Saint, is our Saviour more loving or more tender 



Digitized by Google 



04 



SECOND PABT. 



than here. He here annihilates Himself, as it were, 
and becomes our food, in order to regenerate our souls, 
by uniting us most closely to Himself. 

We look with admiration on the fervour of those 
pure souls, who never approach the Altars, without 
feeling a sensible increase of love for Jesus Christ, and 
being wholly inflamed with it* But it is far more 
marvellous that Communions should be so frequent, 
and yet these marvels of so rare an occurrence. Your 
sins, your relapses, your weaknesses, give you un- 
easiness. You wish to correct yourself, to overcome 
that repugnance, that tepidity, to break that link which 
is the only thing that keeps you back in the path of 
piety. You wish to have an ardent love for Jesus 
Christ. You allow that only those who love Him per* 
fectly are perfectly happy ; and, yet, after so very many 
Communions, you are still so imperfect, so tepid, you 
have no greater love for Jesus Christ 

For a year, for ten years perhaps, you have said 
Mass every day. You have received the Body and 
Blood of Jesus Christ more than three thousand times 
in your life ; and yet, for a year, for ten years, you 
have been fighting against some imagination, some 
fancy, you say, which hinders you from belonging en- 
tirely to God, and from tasting that peace and sweet- 
ness which are enjoyed in His service. Perhaps even 
your love for Jesus Christ is less. " Ah ! my God," 
exclaimed a great servant of God, " are they heretics 
or infidels that speak thus " (Fr. la Colombiere, Keflex. 
Chret). How is it possible that a Christian who feeds 
so often on the Body of Jesus Christ should desire 
anything in vain ? Who will ever believe that a God, 
offered as the price of the graces that are sought, will 
not be able to obtain them ? That Jesus Christ, who 
has instituted this mystery only in order that He may 

* This extraordinary ardour of divine love is marvellous only 
because it is so rare. 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



be loved, will refuse His love to those to whom He 
gives Himself without reserve or restriction ! If, then, 
unhappily we find that by communicating every week, 
or even oftener, or by celebrating Mass dally, we derive 
no profit from this adorable Sacrament, do not amend, 
misuse Holy Communion, do not love Jesus Christ 
more, always feel the same tepidity and weaknesses, are 
we therefore to leave off Communion ? Must we give 
up saying Mass daily? No; but we must regulate 
our life and free ourselves from the vices and failings 
that hinder us from profiting by it The evil does not 
spring from communicating too frequently, but from * 
communicating ill. Suppose that no sort of food did 
you good, because you took it when you should not, 
what would you do in such a case ? Would you abstain 
altogether from eating, or would you adopt every ne- 
cessary precaution in order to derive benefit from what 
you eat ? Suppose that some one formed the extra- 
ordinary resolution of preventing the food which he 
took at his meals from digesting in his stomach. He 
falls ill ; the physicians are consulted. Will any one 
of them be found to advise that the sick man take no 
more food ? He must eat ; but he must do it with the 
necessary precautions. He must be less indiscreet 
and imprudent. If he did not eat, the food would not 
indeed corrupt in his stomach, it is true ; but he would 
die of weakness. This imprudent and culpable reso- 
lution would not hinder digestion, but it would soon 
exhaust the remains of his strength, and you would 
soon see him fall in the course of twenty-four hours 
into a mortal weakness. He would not die of indiges- 
tion, but of hunger. In a word, it would be folly to 
take from him what supports his life, in order to 
deliver him from what makes him ill. It is easy to 
apply this example to those who do not draw any profit 
from Communion. These persons have great reason 
to fear that they are ill-directed, that their conscience 



Digitized by Google 



96 



SECOND PAET. 



is in a bad state, that their faith is too weak, and that 
their confessions are without sincerity, without sorrow, 
or without resolution of amendment. If you are ill- 
disposed, correct yourself at once, in order that you may 
communicate often .If you are imperfect, communicate 
often, in order that you may amend. The Son of God 
calls this adorable mystery our daily bread, to show 
what frequent use we should make of it He calls the 
poor and the blind to His banquet, in order to teach 
us that, however poor we may be, and whatever in- 
firmities we labour under, if we be still living, we must 
9 have no difficulty in eating this bread of life. 

The little fruit that the greater number of persons, 
especially