 to the insults He receives in 
this adorable mystery, and do not adopt all possible 
means to repair them ? 

Meditation for the Fourth Friday in January. 

Dixit autem dominus mnem : Quid faciam ? Mittam 
JUium dilectum ; forsitan cum huncvideiint, verebuntur. 
Quern cum vidissent coloni, ejectum ilium extra vineam, 
ccciderunt. (Luc. xx. 13 et 15.) 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



231 



Then the Lord of the vineyard said : What shall I do ? I 
will send my beloved Son ; it may be, when they 
see him, they will reverence him. Whom, when the 
husbandmen saw, casting him out of the vineyard, 

. they killed him. 

The meaning of this sad parable is too clearly exem- 
plified in the person of Jesus Christ, Whom the Jews 
treated in this manner ; but is not the accomplishment 
of this parable, renewed daily among Christians, by the 
unworthy manner in which Jesus Christ is treated, 
every day, in the most Blessed Sacrament ? 

Could the Eternal Father make use of a more 
suitable means of gaining faithful servants, than to 
send them His only Son? and could Jesus Christ 
Himself invent a more powerful means, of being 
honoured and loved, than by instituting the Adorable 
Eucharist ? But is Jesus Christ loved more ? Is He 
not, on the contrary, more dishonoured? Does the 
ingratitude of the Jews touch us, and are we unmoved 
by our own ? It is a most astonishing fact, that neither 
the presence of J esus Christ, His meekness, His benefits, 
or His miracles have been able to gain the hearts of 
these infidels ; and how long shall the real presence of 
Jesus Christ in the adorable Eucharist, His abjection, 
His silence, His benefits, and all the favours He is ready 
to bestow on us, have no power whatever over the hearts 
of Christians ? 

FEBRUARY. 

Meditation for the Second Friday in February. 

Et dixit ad Mariam matrem ejus : Ecce positus est hie in 
ruinam et in resurrectionem muUorum in Israel, et in 
signum cui contradicetur. (Luc. ii. 34.) 

Simeon said to Mary, His Mother : Behold this child 
is set for the fall and for the resurrection of many in 
Israel, and for a sign which shall be contradicted. 



Digitized by Google 



232 



MEDITATIONS. 



This prediction transfixed, like a sword, the heart of 
Mary, but what impression did it not make on the Heart 
of the Son ? Jesus Christ offered Himself to His Eternal 
Father, for the salvation of all men, and the price which 
He offered, infinitely exceeded the debt He had to pay. 
This sacrifice immolated for all, will, however, be use- 
less to a great number, and this infinite, price, offered 
for all men, will be for the ruin, and the resurrection of 
many. This same victim offers and immolates Himself, 
still daily, on our Altars, by His Priests, for our salva- 
tion, and can we not say, that this same victim is for 
the ruin of many? and how should it be otherwise, 
since He is always a sign for the contradiction of meni 
Some refuse to acknowledge Jesus Christ ; others recog- 
nize, yet despise Him ; the greater number forget Him, 
and even those who think of Him, are not always grate- 
ful. It was not enough, oh my divine Saviour, that this 
propheqy should be fulfilled in Thy life-time ; it must 
be renewed daily, by the contempt shown to Thy sacred 
Person, in the Blessed Sacrament. It pierces with 
grief the soul of the Mother, and shall it never touch 
our hearts ? 

Meditation for the Third Friday in February. 

Assumpsit autem Jesus duodecim, et ait Hits : Ecce ascen- 
dimus Jerosolymam, et consummabuntur omnia qua 
scripta sunt per Prophetas de Filio hominis. Tradetur 
enim gentibus, et ittudetur, et flagellabitur, et conspuetur. 
(Luc. xviii. 31 et 32.) 

Then Jesus took unto Him the twelve, and said to 
them : Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and all things 
shall be accomplished which were written by the 
Prophets concerning the Son of Man, for He shall 
be delivered to the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, 
and scourged, and spit upon. 

What must then have been the sentiments of Jesus 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



233 



Christ! Do you see, He said to His Apostles, this 
people, whom I have so greatly benefited, and in whose 
favour I have wrought so many miracles ? This nation 
will repay these great benefits, by the most enormous 
ingratitude ; I shall place Myself in their hands, and 
they will give Me up to the Gentiles ; I shall become 
an object of hatred to the people, the butt of the soldiers, 
the sport of courtiers, and a victim sacrificed to the 
malice, and the impiety of the Priests. There will be 
no insult, that I shall not suffer, no outrage, that I shall 
not receive, no torment, that I shall not be made to 
endure. But what would this loving Saviour have 
answered, had He been then asked why, foreseeing all 
this, He would place Himself in their hands ; if not, 
that His love was still greater than these outrages, 
and that He exposes Himself, with pleasure, to all these 
insults, to show us the excess of His love ? All this is 
daily renewed in the Adorable Eucharist. Jesus Christ 
has still the same sentiments in our favour ; but, my 
God, what are my sentiments in regard of Jesus Christ, 
Who is so little loved, and so much ill-treated ? 

Meditation for the Fourth Friday in February, 

Qmnibusque mirantibus in omnibus qua faciebat, dixit ad 
Discipvlos mos : Ponite vos in cordibus vestris sermones 
iostos : Filim enim hominis futurum est, ut tradatur in 
tnanus hominum. (Luc. ix. 44.) 

But while all wondered at all the things He did, He 
said to His disciples : Lay you up in your hearts 
these words, for it shall come to pass that the Son 
of man shall be delivered into the hands of men. 

It required an authority as great as that of Jesus 
Christ to convince His disciples, who were the wit- 
nesses of His miracles, that these prodigies, which 
gained Him the admiration of all, would not prevent 



Digitized by Google 



334 



MEDITATIONS. 



men from ill-using Him. The Jews would not love, 
Jesus Christ, and to he at liberty to ill-treat Him, they, 
shut their eyes, that they might not know Him. 
Heretics follow in this the example of the Jews, but 
who would ever have believed that men would be found, 
who would treat Jesus Christ, with the highest degree 
of insult and contempt, in the Adorable Eucharist, 
while they professed to believe, that it was Jesus Christ, 
Whom they were treating so unworthily ? 

Lord, Thou didst command Thy disciples to lay up 
in their hearts these truths, grant they may penetrate 
deeply into mine. 

MARCH. 

Meditation for the Second Fbiday in Maech. 

Tristis est anima mea usque ad mortem ; swtinete hie et 
vigilate mecum . . . et venit ad Discipulos, et invenit 
eos dormientes, et dixit Petro : Sic rum pottdstU una 
hora vigilare mecum t (Matt xxvi. 38 et 40.) 

My soul is sorrowful even unto death ; stay you here 
and watch with Me. — And He cometh to His dis- 
ciples, and findeth them asleep. And He saith to 
Peter : What ! Could you not watch one hour with 
Me? 

We must be very little touched by the affliction of a 
friend, when we repose tranquilly, at the time that we 
see him plunged in the greatest sadness. But how 
painful is this indifference, to a man in deep affliction ! 
There were then only three Apostles with Jesus Christ, 
and the pitiable state to which this divine Saviour is 
reduced, cannot induce them to remain in His com- 
pany, and to watch only one hour with Him. Jesus 
Christ is ordinarily neglected in the Eucharist, and 
how few, even of those who profess to follow Him, and 
lpve Him, are touched by the injuries He receives. 
Jesus Christ is continually about to be betrayed, into 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



235 



the hands of His mortal enemies, and how few, even of 
those, who flatter themselves they are faithful to Jesus 
Christ, come to the foot of our Altars, to spend some 
time in His company ; and to how many, might Jesus 
Christ make daily this reproof : Could you not watch 
one hour with Me ? What answer could I make, oh 
Lord, who lose so many hours in foolish amusements, 
and diversions of vanity ? 

Meditation for the Third Friday in March. 

Et confestim accedens ad Jesum, dixit : Ave Rabbi, et os- 
cvlatus est eum : dixitque iUi Jesus : Amice, ad quid 
venisti ? (Matt. xxvi. 46.) Juda, oscvlo FUium ho- 
minis tradis ? (Luc. xxii. 48.) 

And forthwith coming to Jesus, he said : " Hail Rabbi, 
and he kissed Him. Jesus said to him : Friend, 
whereto art thou come ? Judas, dost thou betray 
the Son of man with a kiss ?" 

It is very painful to see an ungrateful man adding 
deception to malice, trying to deceive us with false 
appearances, and making use of familiarity, and the 
marks of the greatest friendship, to destroy us. My 
divine Saviour, what must be Thy sentiments, in seeing 
that crowd of Christians, whom Thou so eagerly invitest 
to Thy banquet, and admittest with so much love to Thy 
table? Thou givest them in this, the strongest proof 
of excessive love, and they perform an action, which is 
in itself, a visible mark of the affection they ought to 
have for Thee ; but to how many of them cotddst Thou 
say : Friend, why earnest thou hither ? dost thou thus 
betray Me with a kiss ? To how many impure souls 
art Thou given ? to how many hearts stained with 
vice? How many sacrileges are committed under a 
false appearance of piety ? Shall I, oh my God, be 
always insensible to this ? 



Digitized by Google 



286 



MEDITATIONS. 



Meditation for the Fourth Friday in March. 

Mttites autem duxerunt eum in atrium Prcetorii, et convo- 
cant totam cohortem, et caperunt salutare eum, Ave 
Bex Judaorum, et percutiebant caput ejus arundine : 
et conspuebant eum : et ponentes genua adorabant eum. 
(Marc. xv. 16, 18 et 19.) 

And the soldiers led Him away into the court of 
the Palace, and they call together the whole band, 
and they began to salute Him, Hail King of the 
Jews, and they struck His head with a reed, and 
they did spit on Him, and bowing their knees, they 
adored Him. 

Gould the most infamous, and the most wicked among 
men receive worse treatment ? But these painful in- 
sults, these outrages, this unheard of cruelty, which the 
Jews exercised towards the adorable Person of Jesus 
Christ, at the most lasted only a few hours, and they 
have been accompanied by the tears, that compassion 
and love have drawn, from so many faithful servants of 
Jesus Christ, in many centuries. But is not this sad 
tragedy daily renewed, in the outrages that are offered 
to Jesus Christ, in the most Blessed Sacrament. And 
what is this contempt, but what has been renewed 
a hundred times by infidels and wicked Christians? 
How many seem only to enter the house of God, to insult 
Him ? How many dishonour by their ill-behaviour, 
the sanctity of our most tremendous mysteries ? Oh my 
Saviour, that there were at least many faithful servants 
who would be truly grieved, to see Thee every day so 
greatly dishonoured, so little loved, and so ill-used ! 

APRIL. 

Meditation for the Second -Friday in April. 
PUatus autem iterum respondem ait iZZw, Quid ergo vuUU 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS* 



287 



faciam Regi Judaorum ? At iUi iterum clamaverunt : 
Crucifige eum. (1 Marc. xv. 12 et 18.) 

And Pilate again answering, saith to them: What 
will you, then, that I do to the King of the Jews. 
But they cried out the more : Crucify Him, Crucify 
Him. 

It might be said, that they know not what to do with 
Jesus Christ, that He is become useless. To hear 
Pilate and the Jews, Jesus Christ is fit for nothing, 
but to be despised, outraged, and crucified. Unhappy 
people ! dost thou not know what to do with that 
Divine Saviour, Who has been specially given to Thee ? 
This Saviour shall be taken from thee, and given 
to the Gentiles and to the barbarous nations, who will 
know how to profit, by that mysterious stone, which 
thou hast rejected. Jesus Christ is still really present 
in the most Blessed Sacrament; but is Jesus Christ in 
the Blessed Sacrament more useful to us? Do we 
know the treasure that we possess ? Are we well aware of 
the value of this precious victim, and do we profit by 
the benefits we therein possess ? Unhappy countries ! 
Unfortunate kingdoms, in which heresy rules with so 
much tyranny, your abuse and contempt of this august 
Sacrament have reached the utmost height, you have 
not known what to do with this divine Saviour, and 
this divine Saviour has been taken from you, and carried 
at the same time, to the Indians, and savages. But 
my God ! have I known how to profit by the presence, 
and dwelling with us, of this divine Saviour ? 

Meditation fob the Third Friday in April. 

PUatus autem cum audisset hos sermones, adduxit foras 
Jesum, et dixit JucUeis : Ecce Bex vester ; iUi autem 
clamabant : Telle, tolle, crucifige eum : tunc ergo tra- 
didit eis ilium ut crucifigeretur. (Joan xix. 18, 15, 16.) 



Digitized by Google 



238 



MEDITATIONS, 



Now when Pilate had heard these words, he brought 
Jesus forth, and he saith to the Jews. Behold your 
King : but they cried out : away with Him, away 
with Him, crucify Him. Then therefore he delivered 
Him to them for to be crucified. 

Jesus Christ was no longer to be recognized : the rage 
of the Jews had reduced Him, to so horrible a con- 
dition, that it was necessary, that the judge himself 
should tell them, that it was Jesus Christ, Whom he was 
presenting before them. This spectacle would have 
touched the hearts of the most barbarous : the Jews 
themselves would have felt compassion, they would 
have been touched by it, had He been any other than 
Jesus Christ. Behold then this divine Saviour, given 
up to the rage of these furies. Behold Thee then 
satiated with torments and opprobrium, my adorable 
Saviour! Thy love has carried things to the last 
extremity. Was not this enough, without again ex- 
posing Thyself daily in the Blessed Sacrament te 
similar treatment ! Was not this too much ? Yes, He 
will answer, it is too much to appease My Father, 
too much for extinguishing the hatred of My enemies, 
too much for cancelling the sins of the whole world, 
too much for extinguishing all the fires of hell : but it 
is not enough, to show Christians the excess of My 
love. This sufficed to soften My judge and My 
executioners, and to split rocks asunder ; but, neither 
the remembrance of My past torments, nor the view of 
the outrages I continually suffer, are sufficient to move 
the hearts of Christians. Oh hardness ! oh insen- 
sibility ! In effect, all these excesses are incapable 
of overcoming my indifference. I daily see Jesus 
Christ insulted in the Adorable Eucharist, and I daily 
see it with carelessness and coldness. 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



239 



Meditation for the Fourth Friday in April. 

Venit Jesus januis clausis, et stetit in medio, et dixit : Pax 
vobis ; deinde dixit ThorruB : Infer digitum tuum hue, et 
vide mantis meat, et offer manum tuam et mitte in 
latus meum, et noli esse incredulus, sed fidelis. 
(Joan. xx. 26, 27.) 

Jesus cometh, the doors being shut, and stood in the 
midst, and said, Peace be to you : then He saith to 
Thomas, Put in thy finger hither and see My hands, 
and bring hither thy hand and put it into my side, 
and be not faithless, but believing. 

How attractive is this condescension ! and how much 
must He have loved this incredulous Apostle, to con- 
vince him by such persuasive and powerful means ! 
the mere sight of this opened side, inflamed with love 
the heart of this Apostle. Jesus Christ comes daily to 
us in the Blessed Sacrament; He gives us therein, 
the same Body, and in this sacred Body we find the 
same wounds : lastly, He gives us His Heart. He 
makes us touch It ; and all the fire with which It burns, 
has not yet had power to inflame ours. With what 
coldness do we depart from Communion ? we are wholly 
frozen at Jesus Christ's feet The faith and the new 
fervour of St. Thomas, greatly rejoice the Heart of 
Jesus Christ, but what sentiments must He have 
of my insensibility and want of faith ? what sentiments 
ought I to have of it myself? 

MAY. 

Meditation for the Second Friday in May. 

Tanto tempore vobiscum sum, et non cognovistis me. 
(Joan xiv. 9.) 

So long a time have I been with you, and have you 
not known me ? 



Digitized by Google 



240 



MEDITATIONS. 



It seems as if it were impossible, to know Jesus Christ 
well, and not to love Him with tenderness: I know 
not therefore, if we can know Him well, and only 
love Him indifferently. The complaint which He 
makes to His Apostles, manifests to us the sentiments 
of His Heart. Though they had left all to follow Him, 
they did not yet love Him very fervently, because they 
did not know Him perfectly. But has not this divine 
Saviour more reason to give us the same reproof, and to 
say to us, I have been amongst you so long, I have 
been day and night with you, I am with you, only, for 
"the sake of the love I bear you, and still you do not 
know me. If you knew Me, would you leave Me 
alone the greater part of the time ? Would you care so 
little about visiting Me? Would you show so little 
modesty in My presence? Would you have so little 
confidence in Me, in your wants ? Would you not im- 
mediately have recourse to Me, in all the misfortunes 
of life, and could you easily separate yourselves from 
me, during the whole of your lives ? What answer 
should I be able to give ? 

Meditation fob the Third Friday in Mat. 

Dormite jam, et requiescite : Ecce Films hominis tradetur 
in manus peccatorum. (Marc. xiv. 41.) 

Sleep ye now and take your rest : behold the Son of 
man shall be betrayed into the hands of sinners. 

It is very painful to a person that loves much, to see 
himself forsaken in misfortune, by his best friends ;|but 
it is no less afflicting, to see that the few friends, who 
profess to remain faithful, are not at all touched by his 
misfortunes, and even take no part in his distress. 
Jesus Christ in the most Blessed Sacrament, is outraged 
by the greater number of men, He is daily given up 
therein to the hands of sinners, and the greater part of 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



241 



those who profess to love Him are not at all touched by 
the outrages He suffers, and do not even think of testi- 
fying any grief to Him, in seeing Him so unworthily 
treated. You sleep, devout souls; religious persons, 
you repose, whilst Jesus Christ is contemned, and in- 
sulted on every side, in the Adorable Eucharist ! Here 
heretics profane the sacred vessels, and tread under foot 
the consecrated Hosts; there, sinners daily commit the 
most horrible sacrileges ; He is forgotten by all ; He is 
everywhere despised, and you do not feel this contempt, 
and you do nothing to show Him that you feel it ? It 
is in our power to repair these outrages in some degree, 
and are we indifferent to them, do we forget them ? 

Meditation for the Fourth Friday in May. 
Et ccspit pavere, et tadere. (Marc. xiv. 33.) 
Jesus began to fear, and to be heavy. 

A great soul, a truly generous heart seems not to 
suffer, in any extraordinary degree, at the sight of the 
injuries, the torments and the death it has itself chosen, 
and to which it submits spontaneously. But this Heart, 
which resists all torments, cannot be insensible to the 
ingratitude of those for whom it suffers, and this is 
certainly the affliction that causes the grief of Jesus 
Christ in this Mystery of His agony. I do not so much 
complain, He might say, of being dragged through the 
streets of Jerusalem, of being lacerated by scourges, of 
dying on an infamous cross ; all this is my free choice ; 
My love towards men would not allow Me to choose 
any other means ; but what does grieve Me is, that I 
should receive such ill-treatment in the Eucharist, the 
most excellent work of My love, and which I regarded 
as the most efficacious means of being more loved by 
men, and of thus obliging Myself to love them con- 
tinually more and more, of receiving their homages, 
and the reparation they would make by their adorations 

R 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



for the terrible outrages I have received from the Jews; 
that this should be the place where I receive the 
greatest insults, where I am continually forgotten, ill- 
treated, and despised even by those who make a pro- 
fession of piety! 

JUNE. 

Meditation for the Second Friday in June. 

Ego mm panis vita : qui venit ad me, non esuriet ; et qui 
credit in me, non sitiet unquam : sed dixi vobis quia et 
vidistis me, et non creditis. (Joan. vi. 35 et 86.) 

I am the Bread of Life ; he who cometh to Me shall 
not hunger, and he who believeth in Me shall never 
thirst ; but I have said unto you, that you also have 
seen Me, and you believe not. 

A reproof is terrible after a benefit of such a nature. 
It is as if Jesus Christ had said : My children, I have 
not been satisfied with giving My Blood for your ran- 
som ; I give you My Body also to be your food : to die 
for another is the greatest proof of love, but it would 
not be for Me, the greatest proof of love, unless I re- 
newed this sacrifice every day, and a hundred times 
every day : unless, being unable to die more than once, 
I placed Myself continually, for the love of you, in a 
state of death in the Blessed Sacrament. Yet, I have 
already said it, you have seen Me, and you love Me 
little, because your faith is so lamentably weak. Un- 
grateful Christians ! You see what this loving Saviour 
has done for you, you see what He does da3y in the 
Eucharist, and do you love Him more ? If you are so 
little touched by what He does for you, might you not at 
least be moved, by what you yourselves do against Him? 

Meditation for the Third Friday in Junb. 
Et misit nuntios ante conspectum mum : et euntes intra- 
verunt in cwitatem Samaritanorum, ut pararent illi ; et 
non receperunt eum. (Luc. ix, 52 et 53.) 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



243 



And He sent messengers before His face, and going 
they entered into a city of the Samaritans to prepare 
for Him. And they received Him not. 

What opinion do we entertain of these unhappy Sa- 
maritans? what a happiness would it have been for 
them had they known Who it was, that presented 
Himself at their gate, and to whom they refused an 
entrance into their town ! But what were then the 
sentiments of the Heart of Jesus Christ, when the dis- 
ciples related to Him, the manner in which they had 
been treated, and the contempt that was shown for His 
Person ? These unhappy people are not, however, 
alone : there have been at all times Samaritans of this 
kind, who have refused the disciples of Jesus Christ an 
entrance into their city, who have even driven from it 
Jesus Christ Himself. Besides almost the whole of 
Africa and the Eastern countries, many others have 
chased Him away. In how many countries of Europey 
miserably buried in heresy, is He not refused to be 
recognised in the Sacrament of His love, and this 
adorable Saviour sees Himself, so to speak, banished 
from them ? Oh that He were at least better receiyed 
by the rest of Christians ! That He were a little more 
loved, and less unworthily treated even by those who 
receive Him ! 

Meditation for the Fourth Friday in June. 

Et eoderunt Phariscd, et cceperunt conquirere db Mo sig- 
num de calo, tentantes eum; et ingemiscens spiritu, ait: 
Quid generatio ista signum quarit 1 (Marc. viii. 11 
etl8.) 

And the Pharisees came forth, and began to question 
with Him, asking Him a sign from Heaven, and 
tempting Him. And sighing deeply in spirit, He 
saith : " Why doth this generation ask a sign ?" 

This sigh conveys a reproof, and such a reproof is 

r 2 



Digitized by Google 



244 



MEDITATIONS. 



well founded. This Sacred Heart feels most deeply, 
the insensibility and the malice of the Pharisees. 
There was not a city or a town, through which Jesus 
Christ had passed, that had not published His miracles. 
They might themselves have witnessed them a hundred 
times. But he who does not love those that work these 
wonders, is little touched either by what he sees or 
hears. We must feel little love for Jesus Christ, when 
the greatest and most loving of all miracles, that of the 
Eucharist, moves us so little. But, oh my loving 
Saviour, is not our insensibility itself, a miracle 
capable of touching our hearts ? it is a prodigy, oh my 
divine Saviour, capable of drawing sighs continually 
from Thy Heart, if it were still in a condition to be 
pierced with sorrow and grief. But, my God, mine is 
capable of grief and sadness ; grant that it may at least 
feel strongly in future, the little honour it pays Thee, 
and the injury it does Thee. 

JULY. 

Meditation for the Second Fbidat in July. . 

Cldmaverunt ergo rursum omnes, dicentes : Non hunc. 
(Joan, xviii. 40.) 

Then cried they all again, saying : Not this man. 

Whence could arise so extraordinary a hatred, and 
what could render Jesus Christ so odious to them ? 
What sick person was ever presented to Him that, He 
refused to cure ? what person in distress, ever turned 
to Him, whom He would not relieve? This hatred and 
this fury of the Jews terrify us, and certainly grieved 
the Heart of Jesus Christ. But, my Saviour, are there 
not even now hearts, which nourish a similar hatred, 
against the most august, and the most loving of all 
Thy sacraments ? How many heretics are there, who, 
refusing to recognize Thee, in this excellent work 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS, 



245 



of Thy love, cry out still daily, " We will have nothing 
to do with this man ?" how many bad Catholics, who, 
refusing to receive Thee under some vain pretext, or 
receiving Thee unworthily, cry out, "We will have 
nothing to do with this man?" Lastly, how many 
persons, who are considered to lead a very regular life, 
show evidently, by their forgetfulness, their indifference 
towards Thee, and the difficulty they feel in visiting 
Thee in this adorable mystery, that they do not know 
how to value Thee ? Have I not been, am I not now, 
of this number ? 

Meditation fob the Third Friday in July. 

Ego veni in nomine Patris mei, et non accipitis me ; si 
alius venerit in nomine suo, ilium accipietis ? (Joan v. 
43.) 

I am come in the name of My Father, and you receive 
Me not ; if another shall come in his own name, him 
you will receive. 

How reasonable is this reproof? but how penetrating, 
and of what a profound grief, in the heart of Him Who 
makes it, does it give evidence ? What would be the 
feelings of a Prince, if he saw the lowest servant of his 
Father received with honour, while he was treated with 
the utmost contempt ? We respect a man, whom we 
know to be sent from God ; the relics of those, who 
have given their blood for Jesus Christ, inspire us with 
the veneration' due to those generous martyrs; long 
journies even, are undertaken at great inconvenience to 
render them the honour which they deserve, and this 
piety is solid and praiseworthy. But is our devotion 
reasonable, when Jesus Christ Himself, really present 
at all times in the Holy Eucharist, cannot gain our 
respect? We feel no devotion towards the Blessed 
Sacrament ; we feel only disgust for this divine food ; 
we carry our dissipation even to the foot of the Altar ; 



Digitized by Google 



246 MEDITATIONS. 

we never find time to pay Him a visit ; can we not 
resolve to attend upon Him more assiduously ? 

Meditation for the Fourth Friday in July. 

Qui manducat mecum partem, levabit contra me calcaneum 
mum : cum hcec dixisset Jesus, turbatus est spiritu, et 
protestatus est, et dixit. (Joan xiii. 18 et 21.) 

He that eateth bread with me, shall lift up his heel 
against Me : when Jesus had said these things, He 
was troubled in spirit, and He testified and said . . . 

It required a great cause of affliction, to disturb a 
Heart as intrepid as that of Jesus Christ. But the 
contempt, that is shown for the Blessed Sacrament of 
the Altar, is to Him a motive of the most sensible 
grief, which He cannot conceal. This Divine Saviour 
was about to institute the Blessed Sacrament; His 
love presses Him, urges Him on, but His mind brings 
clearly before Him, all the outrages, to which this 
mystery would expose Him. This sad view plunges 
His Heart into an abyss of grief ; He sees that heretics, 
refusing to believe that He has loved us to such 
an excess, will make use of this excess of love, to out- 
rage Him most cruelly ; and also those impious men, 
professing to believe in Him, will commit horrible 
sacrileges. If this Divine Saviour had done for 
demons, the hundredth part of what He has done for 
men, would He have been so ill repaid ? O my Divine 
Saviour, these insults and this ingratitude have had 
power to trouble Thee, and shall I never be touched by 
them ! 

AUGUST. 

Meditation for the Second Friday in August. 

Ex hoc muUi discipvlorum ejus abierunt retro : etjam non 
cum Mo ambulabant ; dixit ergo Jesus ad duodecim : 
Numquid et vos vultis abire ? (Joan vi. 67, 68.) 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



247 



After this, many of His disciples went back and walked 
no more with Him. Then Jesus said to the twelve : 
Will you also go away ? 

This question came from a Heart so inflamed with 
love, and was in itself so strong a proof of excessive 
tenderness, that it could not fail to oblige those, to 
whom it was directed, to love Jesus Christ yet more 
ardently. It had also all the effect that this Divine 
Saviour desired ; and this increase of fervour in the 
Apostles, consoled Him a little, for the affliction He 
felt, at the departure of those who had forsaken Him. 
Jesus Christ often asks us the same question, and for 
the same reason. How happy should we be, if it had 
the same effect ! * Every day this loving Saviour sees 
Himself forsaken by those unhappy creatures, who, 
tired of His benefits, withdraw themselves from His 
Bervice. He is left alone. Faithful servants, fervent 
Christians, hear the question put to you by Jesus 
Christ : And you, He says, will you abandon Me ? Are 
you disgusted with this divine food, and tired of My 
service? will you act like those who go away, and 
come only with the crowd, to offer Me their homage 
mechanically, or to pass the time ? 

Meditation for the Third Friday in August. 

Dixit Uli Jesus : Vulpes foveas habent, et voliteres cceli 
nido8 : FUius autem haminis non habet ubi caput reclinet. 
(Luc. ix. 68.) 

Jesus said to him : The foxes have holes, and the birds 
of the air, nests, but the Son of man hath not where 
to lay His head. 

With what feeling did not Jesus Christ make this 
complaint ? but did He at all exaggerate in complain- 
ing thus ? Is it true that Jesus Christ was everywhere 
persecuted, everywhere ill-treated ? Alas ! the time of 



Digitized by Google 



248 



MEDITATIONS. 



His birth was anticipated by persecution : scarcely was 
He born, than He was obliged to fly, and seek an 
asylum amongst idolaters. He Himself complains of 
the bad treatment He received at Nazareth ; He was 
driven out from Jerusalem; He was refused an en- 
trance into the villages of Samaria ; He was several 
times obliged to make Himself invisible, to escape the 
fury of those, who wished to procure His death, before 
the time had come which He had chosen. But lastly, 
did this period of persecution and contempt, end with 
His mortal life ? Yes, it would have ended, if He had 
not instituted the most Blessed Sacrament. How so ? 
Because Jesus Christ, in this adorable mystery, is not 
safe from the insults and outrages of the impious. No 
one can doubt the fact. Savages, Canadians, and 
Idolaters might indeed doubt it, and never could 
believe it, if they did not know any Christians. But it 
is but too plain to Christians who are witnesses of 
the contempt shown to Jesus Christ in the Adorable 
Eucharist, even though they perhaps may have no 
feeling of grief at all on account of it. 

Meditation fob the Fourth Friday in August. 

At ipse nihil iUis respondebat ; sprevit autem ilium Herodes 
cum exercitu mo : et iUusit indutum veste alba, et remisit 
ad Pilatum. (St. Luke xxiii. 9 et 11.) 

But He answered him nothing. And Herod with his 
army set Him at nought, and mocked Him, putting 
on Him a white garment, and sent Him back to 
Pilate. 

How heroic is this patience, and how attractive this 
meekness ! how admirable and eloquent is this silence, 
and how many beautiful lessons, it teaches us ! But, 
my God, how great was the contempt with which He 
was treated on account of these great virtues, which 
were alone manifest proofs of His Divinity, and which 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 249 

should have gained Him the love and veneration of all ! 
Thy marvellous patience, oh my loving Saviour, and Thy 
admirable silence at the sight of all the outrages Thou 
sufferest in the Adorable Eucharist, have not an effect 
entirely similar ? If the smallest irreverence, if a single 
unworthy Communion, was at once severely punished, 
we should not be so immodest and so wicked. But this 
divine Saviour, Who has so rigorously punished even 
in this life, the least injuries done to His servants, 
Himself endures, without opening His mouth, the con- 
tempt shown to His Adorable Person in this mystery, 
and prefers to expose Himself, to the outrages of sinners 
by His great patience, rather than keep just souls away 
from His holy table, by inspiring them with fear. 
My God, what beautiful lessons does this silence of 
Jesus Christ, in the Adorable Eucharist, teach me ! 

SEPTEMBER. 

Meditation for the Second Friday in September. 

Jesus dixit : Nonne decern mundati sunt ? et novem ubi 
sunt? non est inventus qui rediret, et daret ghriam 
Deo, nisi hie alienigena. (St. Luke xvii. 17 et 18.) 

And Jesus answering, said : Were not ten made clean? 
and where are the nine ? There is no one found to 
return and give glory to God, but this stranger. 

In the world, we cannot endure ingratitude. It is only 
when God is in question that we do not concern our- 
selves about being ungrateful. This wonderful cure, 
this miracle, had been extended to ten persons, and of 
them all, one only was found who thanked his Bene- 
factor. Of all the benefits we have received from Jesus 
Christ, we cannot doubt that the Blessed Eucharist is 
one of the greatest : and even the greater part of the 
blessings we daily receive, are derived from the same 
source. But who thinks of often thanking Jesus 
Christ for this great benefit ? Who returns thanks to 



Digitized by Google 



250 



MEDITATIONS. 



this loving Saviour, who, in abolishing all the other 
sacrifices, has left us a Victim that cannot but be 
pleasing to God, an offering equal to all the other 
benefits we have received from Him, and to those 
that we may ask of Him ; a Host capable of cancelling 
all the sins of men ; a Host which is truly a sovereign 
remedy for all kinds of evil ; a tree of life that has 
power to communicate to us, not only health, but even 
immortality ? So sinful a forgetfulness, such enormous 
ingratitude, touched the Heart of a Man-God, and shall 
it not move mine, even when I myself am of the num- 
ber of these ungrateful wretches ? 

Meditation for the Third Friday in September. 

Et ut appropinquavit, videns Civitatem flevit super Mam 
dicens : Quia si cognovisses et tu, et quidem in hoc die 
tua, quce ad pacem tibi^nunc autem abscondita sunt ab 
octdis tuis. (St. Luke xix. 41 et 42.) 

And when He drew near, seeing the city, He wept 
over it, saying : If thou also hadst known, and that 
in this thy day, the things that are to thy peace ; 
but now they are hidden from thy eyes. 

How well do these tears of the Son of God, express the 
sentiments of His Heart ! Unhappy Jerusalem I Un- 
fortunate people, into what misfortunes does not thy 
blindness precipitate thee ! What wilt thou say, when 
thou shalt see that thy happiness was in thy own 
hands, and that it depended on thyself, to be the hap- 
piest of all nations, if thou wouldst have recognized on 
that day, the best of all Masters, and the meekest of 
Kings ? If Jesus Christ were still Gapable of grief and 
of shedding tears, loving us as He does, could He see 
us without weeping ? But can He at least, behold the 
indifference we feel for Him, in the Adorable Eucharist, 
the contempt we show Him, and the misfortunes that 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



251 



this indifference and this contempt draw down upon 
us, without saying to us, as He did to that unhappy 
people ; Ah slothful Christians ! ungrateful men ! If 
you would recognize at least, on this day which is given 
you, Him who is in the midst of you, Who alone can 
give you peace, and make you eternally happy ! But 
now all this is hidden from your eyes, you will not 
know Me. How would it ever be possible for you to 
be so unhappy, if you knew Me and loved Me ? 

Meditation fob the Foubth Friday in September, 

Ecce venit hora, etjam venit, ut dispergamini unusquisque 
in propria, et me solum relinquatis. (St. John xvi. 32.) 

Behold the hour cometh, and it is now come, that you 
shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall 
leave Me alone. 

What were the sentiments of the Heart of Jesus 
Christ, when preaching to His Apostles, regarding their 
baseness and ingratitude, their flight and their forget- 
fulness ! But could these Apostles persuade them- 
selves, that they would ever be capable of abandoning 
so good a Master ? Nevertheless, it has so happened. 
But my Saviour, this time is past : but how can I say 
this time is past ? The time came when Thou wert 
left alone : and wert Thou then left more alone, than 
Thou art at this time ? Jesus Christ is day and night 
on our Altars, and who is there, that is earnest and 
assiduous in visiting Him ? Was a palace of a prince 
ever without a crowd of courtiers, though the number 
is so small of those that are able to speak, to the 
prince ? Jesus Christ is the only one Who is always 
ready and Who receives all equally : the only one, Who 
has an excessive desire to do good to all, and Jesus 
Christ is almost always alone. 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



OCTOBER. 

Meditation for the Second Friday in October. 

Amen dico vobis, quia unus ex vobis tradet me, qui man- 
ducat mecum ; vce autem homini itti per quern FiUus 
hominis tradetur. (St. Mark xiv. 18 et 21.) 

Amen I say to you, one of you that eateth with me, 
shall betray me : but woe to that man, by whom the 
Son of man shall be betrayed. 

It is not surprising, that the Scribes and Pharisees, 
that impious and wicked men should have conspired 
against Jesus Christ, for they were His mortal enemies, 
and what else can be expected from an enemy ? But 
that Jesus Christ should see Himself betrayed by an 
Apostle, that is, by a man whom this Divine Saviour 
had chosen in preference to so many others, and to 
whom he had given such manifest proofs of the most 
ardent love ! But, my Saviour, since it is Thou, that 
choosest Thy servants and Thy favourites, how long 
wilt Thou find ungrateful men, even traitors, among 
those Thou hast chosen ? Out of so many Christians, 
whom Thou hast selected, by a pure effect of Thy love, 
in preference to so many infidels ; with whom Thou 
condescendest to dwell, on whom Thou so liberally 
bestowest Thy benefits, to whom Thou givest Thyself; 
how many are there who abuse Thy benefits ! how 
many ungrateful men, who refuse to communicate! 
how many traitors, even among those who communi- 
cate ! Shall I oh Lord, be always insensible to all 
this. 

Meditation for the Third Friday in October. 

Populus hie labiis me honorat : cor autem corum longe est 
a me; in vanum autem. me colunt. (St. Mark vii. 6 
et7.) 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



253 



This people honoureth me with their lips, but their 
heart is far from Me. And in vain do they worship 
Me. 

Truly, this honour, which was rendered in appearance 
to Jesus Christ, must have been most insincere ! the 
heart could indeed, have had little share, in the praises, 
that were bestowed on Him, from time to time, since all 
these homages terminated, by His being made to endure 
the greatest outrages, and finally, to expire on the 
cross ! To how many slothful Christians, may not Jesus 
Christ address the same fearful reproof at the present 
day ! That want of recollection in the Churches, that 
disrespect in presence of the Blessed Sacrament, that 
disgust for this divine food, all this clearly proves that 
our homage does not proceed from the heart. We 
have some appearance of devotion : but in this sort of 
devotion, there is much affectation : ah Lord ! can my 
heart be near Thine ; and not be wholly inflamed with 
Thy love ; can it love Thee so little ! 

Meditation for the Fourth Friday in October. 

Jerusalem, Jerusalem . . . Quoties volui congregare 
Jilio8 tuos, quemadmodum galUna congregat puUos suos 
sub alas, et noluisti. (St. Matt, xxiii. 37.) 

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem . . . how often would I 
have gathered together thy children, as the hen doth 
gather her chickens under her wings, and thou 
wouldest not ? 

What answer can this unhappy people make to this 
reproof? But what answer can we ourselves make, 
when it shall be addressed to us also? The figure 
which Jesus Christ here makes use of, shows our in- 
gratitude so much the more clearly, as it expresses 
more forcibly the love of Jesus Christ for us. This 



Digitized by Google 



254 



MEDITATIONS. 



loving Saviour bas placed Himself in the Blessed 
Sacrament, to enable us to find in Him at all times, 
a powerful protector, a physician, a Father. He is 
continually in the midst of us, because He wishes 
to have us constantly with Him. But do not the 
reluctance, and the forgetfulness of the greater number 
of Christians, oblige Him to say to us : My poor 
children, how often would I have gathered you, as 
a hen gathers her chickens, and you have gone away, 
and you have refused ! Do you wonder that you are so 
long afflicted, so often overcome, so often mortally 
wounded! For this reason, there are many among 
you that are sick and languishing, and many sleep the 
slumber of death. Shall I have any feeling in future, 
oh my loving Saviour, of the charitable reproof Thou 
givest me, or of the contempt I have hitherto had for 
it ? 

NOVEMBER. 

Meditation for the Second Friday in November. 

Procidit in faciem suam orans, et dicens : Pater mi, *i 
' possibile est, transeat a me calix iste ; veruntamen non 
sicut ego volo, sed sicut tu* (St. Matt. xxvi. 39.) 

He fell upon His face praying and saying; My 
Father, if it be possible, let this chalice pass from 
me. Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt. 

Jesus Christ had always passionately desired to give 
His Blood, for the salvation of men, and had a hundred 
times testified this desire. It is not then death, which 
terrifies Him, and makes this chalice so bitter, but the 
ingratitude of those very men, who will not profit by 
His death. I have desired, Eternal Father, and more 
than ever I desire, to give liberty to slaves, but I have 
never desired to make ungrateful men. The outrages 
I am about to endure from my enemies, do not alarm 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



255 



Me, but the contempt, that I foresee my own children 
will show Me, afflicts Me, the blindness of the first 
moves Me, but the enormous ingratitude of these last, 
pierces My Heart with grief. Jesus Christ passionately 
desired, that the time were arrived, for instituting the 
most Blessed Sacrament of the Altar ; but were not 
the abuse and the contempt of this august Sacrament, 
which He foresaw, a great cause of sadness to Him ? 
and had He not reason to say, that if it were possible 
He desired this chalice might pass from Him? In 
very truth, this chalice must be very bitter, but do we 
not know, that it depends on us, to remove this chalice 
from Him, for it is we ourselves, who by our contempt 
and unworthiness, constitute all its bitterness, we who 
offer it to Him ? How is this Oh Lord ! It is in my 
power to sweeten this chalice by my homage, and shall 
I not do it ? 

Meditation for the Third Friday in November. 

Conversus autem ad Ulas Jesus dixit : Film Jerusalem, 
nolite flere super me, sed super vos ipsas flete, et super 
filios vestros. (St. Luke xxiii. 28.) 

But Jesus, turning to them said : Daughters *>f Jeru- 
salem, weep not over Me, but weep for yourselves, 
and for your children. 

Was love ever witnessed equal to that which Jesus 
Christ shows us on this occasion ? His body is all 
lacerated with scourges, He has scarcely a few drops of 
blood remaining; He is become the laughing stock and 
the butt of a whole nation, and in this pitiable state, 
He is not at all touched by what He Himself suffers, 
He feels nothing, but what we are about to draw down 
Upon ourselves, by our want of gratitude. Alas ! if 
we have a heart capable of feeling, what can move it, 
if this cannot ? Jesus Christ forgotten, despised, out* 



Digitized by Google 



256 



MEDITATIONS* 



raged in the adorable Eucharist, feels, so to speak, 
more deeply the misfortunes we draw upon ourselves by 
this contempt, than the contempt itself. Weep, He 
says to us, weep, my children, over your forgetfulness 
of your Eedeemer, of your Father. Weep over that 
enormous ingratitude, that you have carried to the 
highest pitch ; over those irreverences, that you have 
committed so boldly, in My presence. Weep for so 
many saerilegious Communions, weep for the great 
loss you have suffered, by refusing to acknowledge Me ; 
or by knowing Me, and refusing to love Me. In what, 
oh my beloved Saviour, can my tears be employed, if I 
can think of my ingratitude without weeping ? 

Meditation for the Fourth Friday in November. 

Begina Austri mrget in judicio cum generatione ista, et 
condemnabit earn ; quia venit a Jinibus terra 'audire 
sapientiam Salomonis ; et ecce, plus quam Salomon hie 
(St. Matt. xii. 42.) 

The queen of the south shall rise in judgment with 
this generation and shall condemn it : because she 
came from the ends of the earth, to hear the wisdom 
of Solomon, and behold a greater than Solomon here. 

There have been newly converted Christians, in the 
Indies and in Japan, who have travelled more than a 
hundred leagues every year, to have the consolation, of 
once adoring Jesus Christ, in the most Blessed Sacra- 
ment, of hearing one single Mass ; and they thought 
nothing of the fatigue, of so difficult a journey, that 
they might have the happiness, of spending half an 
hour with Jesus Christ. My God! how many will 
rise up at the day of judgment, and will condemn us ! 
We have Jesus Christ in our town ; religious persons 
have Jesus Christ in their own house ; and this benefit 
is esteemed as nothing ! and some value it so little, 



Digitized by GoOglc 



MEDITATIONS. 



257 



that they only visit Jesus Christ with indifference, 
many even with repugnance, and almost all,J Without 
devotion. Will not the Queen of the South rise up on 
the day of judgment against this people ? and will she 
not suffice to condemn them, because she came from 
the extremity of the earth, to hear the wisdom of Solo- 
mon? and yet, He who is here upon our Altars, 
is greater than Solomon. 

DECEMBER. 

Meditation for the Second Friday in December. 

Hoc est autem judicium ; quia lux venit in mundum, 
et dilexerunt homines magis tenebras quam lucem. 
(St. John iii. 19.) 

And this is the judgment : because the light is come 
into the world, and men loved darkness rather than 
the light. 

How deplorable is the blindness of the Jews ! and 
what will these unfortunate men be able to say, when 
they shall be reproached, for the misfortunes they have 
drawn upon themselves, by their blindness ? You had 
the light in the midst of you, will it be said to them, 
and you have shut your eyes, because you pre- 
ferred darkness. The Sun of justice so long expected, 
had risen amongst you, and you would not profit by 
the brilliant light which would have made you happy. 
This same light is still with us in the Blessed Sacra- 
ment, but are all Christians wiser than the Jews ? do 
all Christians profit by this light ? and is there no 
reason to fear, that the presence of Jesus Christ in the 
Blessed Sacrament, His Heart open to all men, His 
Heart always ready to pour out upon us all the 
treasures of grace It encloses, and of which It is the 
source, may be the cause of our condemnation ? Do 
we have recourse to Jesus Christ in the Blessed Sacra- 

s 



Digitized by Google 



258 



MEDITATIONS. 



ment ? Do we go to Him with confidence ? Do we 
expect from Him, the lights and helps that are neces- 
sary for us, in the various circumstances of life ? Alas ! 
we despise this light, because we love the darkness, 
and this contempt will be, without doubt, the cause of 
our condemnation. 

Meditation for the Third Friday in Drcembeb. 

JRespondit eis Joannes dicens: Medius autem vestrum 
stetit, quern vos nescitis . . . cujus ego non sum dignus, 
ut solvam ejus corrigiam calceamenti. (St. John i. 26 

. etM.) 

John answered them saying . . . but there hath stood 
one in the midst of you, whom you know not ... 
the latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy to loose. 

What a misfortune for the Jews not to have known 
Him who was in the midst of them ! But do we 
know Him who is amongst us ? Great ones of the 
world, do you know Him ? You, who punish so 
rigorously, the least omissions of the respect due to 
you, and who are so little touched by the outrages 
offered to that Monarch, whom you profess to acknow- 
ledge ? People, do you know Him who is in the 
midst of you, you, who are so assiduous in attending 
upon those, from whom you hope for some favour, and 
so circumspect in the presence of those you fear, while 
you show no respect in the Church, and never find a 
moment of time, to come and pay your homage, to 
Jesus Christ, in the Blessed Sacrament? Lastly, 
ministers of our Lord, religious persons, do you know 
Him who is continually in the midst of you ? For, 
if you do know Him, whence comes it that you are 
so seldom near Him ? No Lord, we do not know 
Thee ; I confess tlfat hitherto I have not known Thee ; 
but my devotion towards Thee shall show in future, 



Digitized by Google 



MEDITATIONS. 



259 



that I begin really and truly to know Thee, because I 
will begin really to love Thee. 

Meditation for the Fourth Friday in December. 

Factum est autem cum merit tin, impleti sunt dies ut 
pareret, et peperit FUium suum primogenitum, et 
reclinavit eum in prasepio ; quia non erat ei locus in 
diversorio. (Luc. ii. 6 et 7.) 

And it came to pass, that when they were there, her 
days were accomplished that she should be delivered. 
And she brought forth her first-born Son, and laid 
Him in a manger, because there was no room for 
them in the inn. 

There is room for all, and none for Jesus Christ ! This 
divine Saviour begins, even before His birth, to be re- 
jected and despised. A Man- God is reduced to be bom 
in a stable, whilst mere men are born in palaces. What 
were then the sentiments of Jesus Christ, on seeing 
Himself so wretchedly lodged, and what must they bo 
at the present day, seeing Himself ill-received, when 
Christians dwell in magnificent houses ? Do all the 
sacred vessels, in which Jesus Christ is continually 
enclosed, do all the holy places where He dwells, corre- 
spond with that sumptuous magnificence, that we wit- 
ness, in the apartments and furniture, of persons in the 
world ? Oh that, at least, this loving Saviour did not 
often find Himself received in impure souls, and hearts 
stained with a thousand sins ! I know, my loving Saviour, 
that Thy delights are to be with a pure heart ; purify 
mine then, that Thou mayest find Thy delight in it. 
Grant that in future, I may have the happiness of re- 
ceiving Thee less unworthily. Inflame this heart with 
Thy pure love ; may Thy Sacred Heart come and take 
the place of mine ; may mine in future be so intimately 
united to Thine, that it may have no other sentiments. 
Amen. 

s 2 



Digitized by Google 



260 



EJACULATIONS. 



EJACULATIONS. 

Good Jesus, too late have I known Thee, too late have 
I loved Thee ! I will love Thee, because Thou hast 
loved me first. Grant me a heart that may think of 
Thee, a soul that may love Thee. 

I will know Thee Lord, Who knowest me, I wiU 
know Thee, the strength of my soul : show Thyself to 
me, oh my comforter. 

Grant that my heart may desire Thee ; desiring Thee, 
may seek Thee ; seeking Thee, may find Thee ; and 
finding Thee, may love Thee. 

O love, which burnest always, and art never extin- 
guished, inflame me wholly with thy fire, with thy love, 
with thy sweetness ! 

O my joy, draw my heart to Thee ! Sweet food of my 
soul, may I feed upon Thee ! 

Thou hast loved me, Lord, more than Thyself, for 
Thou hast been willing to die for me; that Thou 
mightest redeem a servant, Thou hast delivered up 
Thyself. 

Grant to my heart repentance; to my spirit con- 
trition ; to my eyes a fountain of tears. 

Extinguish in me the desires of the flesh, and in. 
flame me with the fire of Thy love. 

Look down, oh holy Father, on the torments of the 
[Redeemer, and forgive the sins of the redeemed. 

0 Lord Jesus ! I am the wound of Thy torments, 
and the cause of Thy death ; I am the bruises of Thy 
passion, I am the burden of Thy anguish. 

1 entreat of Thee, oh my hope, through all Thy 
mercies, to forgive all my iniquities. 

I could offend Thee, oh holy Father, of myself, but 
I could not appease Thee ; behold in Thy Son what 
will cause Thee to show mercy to Thy servant. 



Digitized by Google 



EJACULATIONS. 



261 



He is a Priest and sacrifice for us to Thee ; and He 
is a sacrifice, because He is a Priest. 

I should despair, on account of my exceeding great 
sins, unless Thy Word, oh my God, had been made 
Flesh, and had dwelt amongst us. 

O charity ! oh mercy ! oh my Redeemer and my 
hope ! in Thee I breathe, to Thee I sigh. 

I, whom Thou lovest, am not worthy, but certainly 
Thou, Whom I wish to love, art not unworthy. 

Hope of my heart, if I have not as yet deserved to 
love Thee as much as I ought, at least I desire to love 
Theto as much as I ought. 

Grant that I may see Thee, the joy of my heart ; 
grant that I may love Thee, the life of my soul. 

Be in my mind, be in my heart, because I languish 
with love, because without Thee I die ; it is better for 
me not to exist, than to be without Jesus. 

0 Lord Jesus, light of the hearts of those who see 
Thee, and life of the souls of those . who love Thee, 
come into my heart, I beseech Thee ! 

Come into my soul, that Thou mayest possess it, 
and that I may place Thee as a seal upon my heart. 

Be with me, Thou, Whom I seek, Whom I love, 
Whom, with my heart and mouth, as well as I am able, 
I praise and adore. 



Digitized by Google 



262 



^EJACULATIONS. 



EJACULATIONS. 

Oh my God, my'jesus, whom shall I love, if I love not 
Thee, my sovereign Good ? 

Place me within Thy wounds, unite me to Thy Heart, 
that I may never more separate myself from Thee. 

Oh most merciful Jesus ! I weep for the time when 
I did not know Thee, I weep for the sins hy which I 
have offended Thee. Ah, how many years have I lost, 
in which I might have loved Thee ! 

I weep for my sins, and I will always weep for the 
outrages that are committed against Thy love, and 
against Thy most sweet Heart. 

Accept, oh holy Father and my God, the most sweet 
sentiments of the Heart of Thy Messed Jesus : I offer 
them to Thee in satisfaction for my sins, and those of 
the whole world. 

Oh my Beloved, my Lord, why do men forget Thee ! 
why do they not love Thee, Who didst die to love us ! 

What can I give Thee to repay some little of the 
great debt I owe Thee ? 

I offer my heart to Thy love, Thy love to Thyself. 

My adorable Saviour and my God, I hope in Thee, 
in Thee I will live and die. 

O Heart wounded through love of me, wound mine 
with Thy holy love. 

O may my heart burn with Thy most sweet love, and 
melt with contrition for having so much offended Thee. 

May I live in grief and contrition, to die loving Thee, 
in Thee, and with Thee. 

When, my Jesus, shall I see Thee, to love Thee 
always. 

When shall I cling to Thy adorable feet, embrace 
Thy sacred side, and wholly unite myself to Thy most 
loving Heart ? 



Digitized by Google 



EJACULATIONS. 



263 



0 my Saviour, my mercy, show now what Thou 
canst do in me ; help me in my sorrows, in my 
afflictions, in my fears. 

In Thy mercy watch over me in life, defend me in 
dangers, save me at my last hour. 

1 consecrate to Thee my life for ever, to Thee every 
breath I draw, to Thee all the motions of my poor 
heart. 

I offer and unite, to Thy life and passion, every action, 
every good work I do ; help me to do much that I may 
love Thee more. 

Glory be to Thee, oh my God, as it was, as it is, and 
as it ever shall be, world without end. 



FINIS. 



Digitized by Google 



264 



INDEX. 

PAGE 

The Authors Preface i 

Notice viii 

MOTIVES OF THE DEVOTION TO THE SACRED 
HEART OP OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST. 

FIRST PART. 

Chapter I.— What is meant by Devotion to the Sacred 
Heart of oar Lord J esus Christ and in what it consists . . 1 

Chapter II. — The means employed by Almighty God to 
inspire this devotion 6 

Chapter III. — How just and reasonable is the devotion to 
the Sacred Heart of our Lord Jesus Christ 10 

I. — The excellence of the Adorable Heart of our Lord 
Jesus Christ 11 

II. — The amiable qualities which are found in the 
person of Jesus Christ 13 

III. — The sensible proofs of the immense love that Jesus 
Christ has for us 16 

IV. — The extreme ingratitude of men towards Jesus 
Christ 21 

Chapter IV. — How useful the devotion is for our salvation 
and for our perfection 25 

V. — How much true sweetness there is in the devo- 
tion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 30 

VI. — Of the devotion that the Saints have had to the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ 34 

SECOND PART. 

Chapter I. — The dispositions requisite for a tender devo- 
tion to the Sacred Heart of our Lord Jesus Christ 42 

I. — First Disposition. — A great horror of Sin ib. 

II. — Second Disposition. — A lively Faith 43 



Digitized by Google 



INDEX. 265 
PAGE 

III. — Third Disposition. — A great desire of having an 
ardent love of Jesus Christ 45 

I V. — Fourth Disposition. — Interior Recollection .... 47 

Chapter II. — What are the obstacles which prevent us 
from gathering all the fruit we ought from the devotion 
to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ 56 

I. — First obstacle.— Tepidity 58 

II. — Second Obstacle.— Self-love 65 

III. — Third Obstacle.— A secret Pride 69 

IV. — Fourth Obstacle.— Some unmortified Passion . . 73 

Chapter III. — The means of overcoming the obstacles that 
hinder us from gathering the fruit we ought from the 
devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ 76 

I. — First Means. — True mortification 77 

II. — Second Means.— Sincere Humility 81 

III. — The joy and true sweetness that are inseparable 
from the exercise of true mortification and of sincere 
humility. 83 

Chapter IV. — The particular means of acquiring the per- 
fect love of Jesus Christ and this tender devotion to 
His Sacred Heart 89 

I. — First Means.— Prayer ib. 

II. — Second Means. — Frequent Communion 92 

III. — Third Means.— Visits to the Blessed Sacrament 98 

IV. — Fourth Means.— Fidelity in accomplishing with 
exactness some practices of this devotion 99 

V. — Fifth Means.— A tender devotion towards the 
Blessed Virgin 101 

VI. — Sixth Means.— A special devotion to St Aloysius 
Gonzaga 106 

VII. — A Day of Retreat every month 110 

THIRD PART. 

Chapter I. — What are the motives and sentiments with 
which we should practise this devotion 112 

Chapter II. — Visits to the Blessed Sacrament 119 

I. — The motives that should induce us to visit the 
Blessed Sacrament , ib. 



Digitized by Google 



266 INDEX. 

PAGE 

IT. — Method of Visiting the Blessed Sacrament 124 

III. — Practice for spending every day, a quarter or 
half an hour, in prayer before the Blessed Sacrament, 
suited to all sorts of persons 131 

I V. — A few words of advice on frequent Visits to the 
Blessed Sacrament 135 

Chapter III.— Practice for celebrating and hearing Mass . 138 

I. — -Reflection on the Sacrifice of the Mass • ib. 

II. — Practice for the celebration of the Sacrifice of the 
Mass 142 

III. — Practice for assisting at the Sacrifice of the 
Mass 147 

Chapter IV— Practical Reflections on Communion ...... 151 

Chapter V.— What are the marks of the perfect love of 
Jesus Christ and of true devotion to His Sacred 
Heart... 159 

I.— Character of one who has a true love of Jesus 

Christ 160 

IL— . Effects of the perfect love of Jesus Christ 167 

Chapter VI. — Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus for the day of the Feast 174 

Chapter VIL— Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus for every month, for every week, for every day, 
and for certain hours of each day 180 

I. — Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
for the first Friday in each month ib. 

IL — Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
for every week 183 

III. — Practice of devotion to the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus for every day 184 

Chapter VIII.— The Exercises of this Devotion 188 

Preparation of honour to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
Christ 189 

Act of Consecration to the Sacred Heart of Jesus 
Christ 191 

Offering to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ 193 

Act of Love to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ .... 195 

Act of adoration of the Sacred Heart of J esus Christ . . 196 



Digitized by Google 



INDEX. , 267 
PAGE 

Offering, that may be made at the time of Mass .... 196 

Act of Contrition 197 

Prayer, that St. Gertrude used to recite every day, in 
honour of the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ 198 

Act of love ib. 

MEDITATIONS FOR THE FEAST OF THE 
SACKED HEART OF JESUS, 
For every Friday in each month, and for certain days 
of the year, more especially consecrated to the honour 
of the Sacred Heart of our Lord Jesus Christ 199 

For the first Friday after the Octave of Corpus 
Christi, on the incomprehensible love shown us by 
Jesus Christ, in the most Blessed Sacrament of the 
Altar ib. 

1st Point— The ardent desire Jesus Christ feels to 
be with us • 201 

2nd Point.— The excessive desire of Jesus Christ to 
make us partakers of His blessings 205 

3rd Point—The excessive desire of Jesus Christ to 
be united with us . . . 210 

Meditation for the first Friday in each month, on the 
sentiments of the Heart of Jesus Christ at the sight of 
the ingratitude of men, and of the outrages, to which 
His excessive love for these very men, has exposed 
Him 217 

1st Point— The sentiments of the Heart of Jesus 
Christ at the sight of the torments He would have to 
endure from the cruelty of the Jews ib. 

2nd Point.— The sentiments of the Heart of Jesus 
Christ at the sight of the outrages He would endure 
from the malice of Heretics 220 

3rd Point.— The sentiments of the Heart of Jesus 
Christ at the sight of the ingratitude of the greater 
number of the Faithful 222 

Subjects of Meditation for every Friday in the year • . 226 

January. — Meditation for the 2nd Friday 227 

1st Point ib. 

2nd Point 228 

For the 3rd Friday 229 

For the 4th Friday 230 



Digitized by Google 



263 . , INDEX. 

PAGE 

February.— For the 2nd Friday 231 

For the 3rd Friday 232 

For the 4th Friday _. 233 

March.— For the 2nd Friday 234 

For the 3rd Friday 235 

For the 4th Friday 236 

April.— For the 2nd Friday ib. 

For the 3rd Friday 237 

For the 4th Friday 239 

May.— For the 2nd Friday ib. 

For the 3rd Friday 240 

For the 4th Friday 241 

June.— For the 2nd Friday 242 

For the 3rd Friday . ib. 

For the 4th Friday 243 

July.— For the 2nd Friday . f 244 

For the 3rd Friday .• 246 

For the 4th Friday 246 

August— For the 2nd Friday ib. 

For the 3rd Friday 247 

For the 4th Friday 248 

September.— For the 2nd Friday 249 4 

For the 3rd Friday 250 ' " 

For the 4th Friday 261 

October.— For the 2nd Friday 252 " 

For the 3rd Friday . . . ib. 

For the 4th Friday 253 

November.— For the 2nd Friday 254 

For the 3rd Friday 255 

For the 4th Friday 256 

December.— For the 2nd Friday 257 

For the 3rd Friday 258 

For the 4th Friday 259 

Ejaculations 260 

4 JF63 



Digitized by Google 



y Google 



y Google 



y Google 



