 Priests, draw from frequent Communion, 
gives rise sometimes to a doubt, whether it be advisable 
to communicate so frequently. But this doubt cannot 
be better answered than by quoting here what St. 
Francis of Sales has said on this subject. 

" I do not wish," says the Saint (Introd. to a Devout 
Life, pt. ii. ch. 20), " either to blame or to praise those 
who, not being Priests, communicate every day. But I 
advise all, and exhort them as earnestly as I can, to 
communicate every eight days, provided they have no 
affection to sin." These are the very words of St. 
Augustin, he continues. He neither praises nor blames 
absolutely those who communicate every day, but leaves 
the matter to the prudence of the director. For as the 
disposition necessary for communicating so frequently 
is so very rare, it is not well to advise it generally. 
But inasmuch as this disposition, however rare, may 
be found in many persons of solid virtue, it is not well 
on the other hand to forbid it generally to all. 

As it would be imprudence to recommend so frequent 
a use of the holy Eucharist to all indifferently, so it 
would be no less imprudence to blame those who make 
frequent use of it, by the advice of a wise director. 
The answer of St. Catherine of Sienna, on this subject, 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTEB IV. 



97 



is to the purpose. You teH me that I ought not to 
communicate so often, because St. Augustin neither 
praises nor blames those who do so every day. Since 
St. Augustin, she answers, does not blame it, do not 
do so yourself. You see Philothea, that St Augustin 
exhorts and strongly recommends to communicate every 
Sunday. Do so then, as far as you can. For since, 
as I suppose, you have no affection either to mortal or 
venial sin, you have the disposition required by St. 
Augustin. Nay, you have more; for not only have 
you no affection for sinning, but you have no affection 
for sin. You should therefore communicate every 
Sunday, and even oftener, if your spiritual Father 
judge it proper. 

If worldly persons, adds the Saint, in the following 
chapter (Int. to a Devout Life, pt. ii. ch. 21.) should 
ask you why you communicate so frequently, tell them 
it is to learn to love God, to purify yourself from your 
imperfections, to free yourself from your miseries, to 
console yourself in your afflictions, to gain strength in 
your weaknesses. Tell them that two kinds of persons 
should communicate frequently; the perfect, because 
being well disposed, they would do wrong not to ap- 
proach the source of perfection and sanctity, and the 
imperfect, in order that they may amend and become 
perfect ; the strong, that they may not become weak, 
and the weak that they may become strong ; the sick 
in order that they may be cured, and those who are 
well that they may not become ill. That, as regards 
yourself, as you are imperfect, weak and infirm, you. 
require frequently to communicate with Him who is 
your perfection, your strength, your medicine. Tell 
them, that persons in the world who have not much to 
do, should do so no less frequently, because they need 
greater helps, and that those who labour much and 
undergo great fatigue, should take solid food and eat 
frequently. Tell them that you communicate often in 

H 



Digitized by Google 



98 



SECOND PART. 



order to learn to do it well, for what we seldom do, we 
never do well. 

Communicate often, Philothea, and as often as you 
can with the advice of your director. Hares become 
white in our mountains during winter, from seeing and 
eating nothing but snow. So, by adoring and receiving 
Him Who is beauty, goodness, and purity Itself, in this 
august Sacrament, you will be insensibly purified from 
your sins, and become better and more pure every day. 

This is the advice St. Francis of Sales gives to all 
those who have a horror for every kind of mortal sin, 
and a real desire of securing their salvation. It is 
true that the desire to communicate is ordinarily found 
in all who have a lively faith and who really love Jesus 
Christ ; and, on the contrary, we too often experience 
that in proportion as we mix with the world, and as the 
love of Jesus Christ grows cold within us, we feel the 
greater difficulty in communicating. It is superfluous, 
therefore, to preach to the wicked, that they must 
abstain from Communion. They are too ready to do it 
of themselves. We never find that souls, corrupted by 
vice and immersed in it, hunger after this heavenly 
food, which forms the delight of pure souls and of all 
who love Jesus Christ. 

III. Third Means. — Visits to the Blessed Sacrament. 

The third means is often to visit the Blessed Sacra- 
ment. Friendship is kept up and increased among 
men by visits and frequent conversations. It is by this 
means, also, that we shall continually increase in an 
ardent love for Jesus Christ As He dwells on our 
Altars in order that He may be constantly with us, 
what must be His sentiments regarding those whom 
He rarely sees in His presence. It seems as if nothing 
gained His Heart more completely than these frequent 
adorations and visits. It is at these times that He 
usually bestows His gifts in greater abundance, and it 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



99 



may be said, that of all the favours He then grants, 
the most ordinary is the grace of His love. 

There are visits of civility, and there are visits also 
of pure friendship. To fail in the first would be a 
fault, but it is only during the latter that His special 
favours are usually granted. The greater feasts, the 
time of Mass and of Divine office, are in respect of 
Jesus Christ the same thing as visits of duty and 
civility to great persons. We should be noticed, or 
even punished, if we were not there with* the crowd. 
But the visits that are made at certain hours of the 
day, at which Jesus Christ is not generally visited, 
but, on the contrary, forgotten by the greater number, 
are visits of friendship. It is at this time, more than 
any other, that Jesus Christ converses familiarly, so to 
speak, with His favourites, and He showers upon them 
the treasures of His graces and inflames them with 
His love. Whether it be that the indifference of those 
who then forget Him, renders the fidelity of those who 
visit Him more precious, all the Saints have experienced 
that there is no more infallible means of soon obtaining 
a great love of Jesus Christ, than frequently to visit Him 
in the Churches, particularly at certain hours of the 
day when He is so little honoured and so rarely visited. 
In the third part will be found the manner of making 
these visits, and the reason is explained why those who 
make them often derive so little profit from them. We 
will here only observe, that when we make them in 
such a manner as if we really believed that it is Jesus 
Christ Whom we are visiting, they are an infallible 
means of obtaining, in a short time, a perfect love for 
Jesus Christ. 

IV. Fourth Means. — Fidelity in accomplishing with 
exactness some practices of this devotion. 

The fourth means is, fidelity in accomplishing with 
exactness some little practices which Jesus Christ has 

h 2 



Digitized by Google 



100 



SECOND PART. 



declared to be very pleasing to Him, and well suited to 
honour His Sacred Heart, and inflame us, in a short 
time, with an ardent love of Him. These practices 
consist in some visits to the Blessed Sacrament, certain 
prayers, and some Communions, more frequent and more 
devout ; and all this from certain motives which will be 
explained in the first Chapter of the Third Part. 

There are some persons who, from a false idea of 
virtue, treat as frivolous all practices of devotion that 
seem to them too easy, and have little esteem for what- 
ever does not give them an opportunity of distinguish- 
ing 'themselves. Such persons will not feel much 
fervour, perhaps, in regard of these practices, because 
they contain nothing striking or very extraordinary. 
They will imagine, that what every one can do, cannot 
be so very effectual a means of becoming what in effect 
few are. But, without examining here the true cause of 
this illusion, might we not make them the same answer 
which was made to Naaman, whofce ideas were somewhat 
similar to these ? Even though something very diffi- 
cult were proposed to you in order to obtain so great a 
grace, you ought not to refuse to do it. With how 
much greater reason, then, ought you to try the efficacy 
of the means proposed to you, since it costs you so little. 

It is necessary, indeed, that there should be perse- 
verance and exactness in perfectly accomplishing what 
is enjoined in these little practices. This fidelity is 
usually what is most grateful to God and most meri- 
torious in any devotional exercises. It is always the 
least suspicious sign of sincere love. It would be much 
better to do less and to be more constant. Our good 
works are perfect in proportion as they are less accom- 
panied by self-will. Now, those who continually change 
their practices of devotion, or the time of these practices, 
are certainly persons who act only by the movement of 
their own will. For what other motive can they have 
in making these changes ? 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTEB IV. 



101 



In perseverance, then, properly consists that generous 
fidelity which is the most certain proof of a great love 
for Jesus Christ. If we consider seriously what we do 
for God, we shall see, that however great may he our 
lahour, we do hut very little. In another sense, however, it 
may he truly said, that it is no little matter to persevere 
steadily, without taking notice of the disposition we 
happen to be in, or of our feelings at the time, or of 
numberless other specious pretexts which present them- 
selves every day, and which our natural inconsistency 
represents to us as lawful reasons for changing, or at 
least interrupting, our practices of devotion. To be 
always constant, whether we be sad or joyous, in tran- 
quillity or fatigued, in peace or in a tumult, and to 
fulfil steadily for Jesus Christ certain obligations which 
the love and gratitude we wish to show Him impose on 
us, is to be truly faithful to Him, and to have a true 
love for Jesus Christ. 

V. Fifth Means. — A tender devotion towards the 
Blessed Virgin* 

The fifth means for gaining quickly an ardent love 
for Jesus Christ is to have a tender devotion to the 
Blessed Virgin, who has so absolute a power over the 
Sacred Heart of her Son. It cannot be doubted but 
that the Blessed Virgin is of all creatures the one who 
has had the greatest love for Jesus Christ, has been 
most loved by Him, and has had also the most ardent 
desire that He should be perfectly loved. She is the 
Mother of perfect love : " Mater pvlehra dilectionis." 
To her we must have recourse, if we would be inflamed 
with it. The Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary are too 
much alike, and too closely united, for it to be possible 
that we should have an entrance into one and not gain 
an entrance into the other ; with this difference, how- 
ever, that the Heart of Jesus admits only souls of the 
greatest purity, whereas the Heart of Mary purifies 



Digitized by Google 



102 



SECOND PART. 



such as are not so by the graces which she obtains 
for them, and makes them fit to be received into the 
Heart of Jesus. 

Though all the other means of acquiring an ardent 
love of Jesus Christ are easy and efficacious, this ap- 
pears the easiest for many. Few have all the disposi- 
tions necessary for being inflamed with divine love. But 
there are few who cannot very easily obtain them by 
means of the Blessed Virgin. Sinners even ought not 
to despair. Mary is the hope of sinners ; Mary is the 
refuge of all the miserable (St. Aug. serm. xviii. on the 
Saints ; St. Ephraim, Praises of the B.V.) ; she is the 
bulwark of help for all. Jesus Christ easily grants to 
her what we are unworthy to receive — " Quia indignus 
eras cui donaret," says St. Bernard (Serm. iii., Vig. of 
Nativity), " datum est Mariae ut per illam acciperes 
quidquid haberes." He has established her as the dis- 
pensatrix of His graces, and has resolved to grant none 
that should not pass through her hands : " Nihil nos 
Deus habere voluit, quod per manus Marise non tran- 
siret." Let us have a tender love for the Mother, and 
we shall soon be inflamed with an ardent love for the 
Son. It is a mark that we do not desire the love of the 
Son, when we do not feel a great tenderness for the 
Mother. Without this great tenderness for the Blessed 
Virgin, we can never hope to have an entrance into the 
Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ. It has been observed 
that there has never been any one, who felt only in- 
difference for the Blessed Virgin, who had not at the 
same time an aversion for Jesus Christ. Indeed, it is 
from the aversion such persons have for Jesus Christ, 
that their indifference and aversion for the Blessed 
Virgin arises. " Qvimeodit" said the Son of God, " et 
Patrem meum odit ; he that hateth Me, hateth My Father 
also" For the same reason it may be said, that there 
never was a heretic in the world that was not an enemy 
of the Blessed Virgin, because there has never been 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



103 



one that has not hated Jesus Christ. All the works 
composed by them tend no less to extinguish the love 
of the Mother than that of the Son. There has never 
been one of these secret enemies of Jesus Christ, occu- 
pied as they are in destroying the means most suited 
to make us love Him, who has inspired us with devo- 
tion towards the Blessed Virgin, or rather who has not 
sought, by every possible means, to extinguish in the 
hearts of the faithful so just and so solid a devotion. 

This has been remarked by one of the most zealous 
and distinguished prelates of these times, the illustrious 
Archbishop of Malmes, in his admirable Pastoral Letter, 
on which Pope Innocent XII. has pronounced so high 
an eulogium, in the Brief which he wrote to this 
Prelate. This Pastoral Letter is full of the spirit and 
zeal which animated St Charles Borromeo and St. 
Francis of Sales. It will rank as a masterpiece of this 
style of writing, whether we consider the beautiful 
instructions it contains, the sound morality which 
pervades it, or the -solidity of the doctrine which it 
inculcates. Let us hear in what terms this great 
Prelate expresses himself, regarding the false zeal of 
those who, so far from urging all the faithful to devo- 
tion towards the Blessed Virgin, seem even to do all in 
their power to discredit it. 

" It scandalizes Catholics," he says, " in the highest 
degree, to perceive that discredit is covertly thrown 
upon the devotion which they have imbibed with their 
mother's milk, and which has been so frequently and 
so earnestly recommended to them by those who have 
had the care of their instruction. It scandalizes them 
to see that images are no longer valued ; that pil- 
grimages of devotion are made a jest of, and that the 
insipid and unchristian jests of Erasmus are used for 
this purpose ; that in private conversations, and even 
in anonymous libels, the Sodalities instituted in honour 
of the Blessed Virgin are decried, whilst all who are 



Digitized by Google 



104 



SECOND PART. 



faithful to the pious and holy practices of their fore- 
fathers are taking up their defence, and desire that 
they should be again now, as in the time of their 
ancestors, the mark by which a Catholic is recognized 
and distinguished from a heretic." 

And elsewhere, "We recommend earnestly to all," 
he says, " devotion towards the Blessed Virgin. We 
desire that you employ your efforts to increase this 
devotion and make it flourish more and more amongst 
the Faithful ; that her pictures be visited with devo- 
tion, especially those at which miracles are wrought ; 
that they be carried in procession, as is customary ; 
that wax candles be lighted, Hymns and Litanies sung, 
and devotions performed before her statues ; that con- 
gregations and confraternities erected in her honour be 
spoken of with respect, as also the privileges and 
immunities granted by the Pontiffs to them ; that those 
who are not yet admitted be invited to join them ; that 
they be instituted in places where they do not exist, 
and re-established where they have been abolished ; 
that it be known, that to injure any one of these objects 
is to wound us most deeply ; how much more to cen- 
sure or destroy them. 

" We inherit from our ancestors these tender senti- 
ments of piety towards the Blessed Virgin. In spite of 
the rage of the heretics who surround us, we have 
happily preserved them. I desire with all my heart, 
that they should strike root more and more deeply in 
the hearts of the faithful. We feel urged to this by 
the advice and example of many holy personages, 
whom it is not necessary to particularize here. We 
may say, that all who have distinguished themselves in 
past ages by extraordinary sanctity, have given, in 
their lives, manifest marks of this devotion towards the 
Blessed Virgin. 

" Nor need we in this matter give ear to the vain 
scruples of heretics, and other enemies of Mary's honour, 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



105 



■who pretend that the respect shown to the Mother 
wounds the rights of the Son. The faithful are not so 
ill-instructed, as not to know what they owe to the Son, 
and that it is only in consideration of Him that honour 

is shown to the Mother All agree, that it is for 

the love of the Son that we honour the Mother, <or 
rather, that in the Mother we honour the Son, who, on 
His part, will visit with rigorous vengeance all that 
wounds the honour of His Mother. The Saints often 
tell us this, and the deplorable fall of some Christians 
clearly proves it to us. No sooner does a Christian 
relax in devotion towards the Mother, than devotion 
towards the Son insensibly decays, and becomes at last 
wholly extinct. 

" The zeal of St. Charles Borromeo in extending the 
devotion to the Blessed Virgin, the decrees he has 
made in her honour, are seen in the various Councils 
held by his care and authority at Milan. For there is 
hardly one, in which this virtuous Prelate does not 
manifestly show by words, and solid and lasting monu- 
ments, his ardent affection towards the Queen of 
Heaven. 

" The works of the holy Bishop of Geneva are full of 
the same sentiments ; and his life is replete with 
actions that attest the same devotion. He glories, in 
one place, that he belongs, as did almost the whole 
city, to the Confraternity of the Holy Rosary. I say 
nothing of St. Anselm, of St. Bernard, of St. Norbert. 
Let Pastors take these Saints as their models, and 
propose them to their flocks as excellent examples for 
imitation " 

It is rare indeed to meet with persons wanting in 
tenderness for the Blessed Virgin, and in an inclination 
towards that love which we should have for Mary, and 
that singular veneration which we owe her. We may 
say, that devotion to the Blessed Virgin Mary is uni- 
versal in our days. It is certain that devotion to the 



Digitized by Google 



106 



SECOND PAET. 



Mother will never be disparaged, but by the enemies of 
her Son. As for us, who desire to love her Son most 
ardently, we will neglect nothing that will help us to 
love the Mother tenderly; and let us be convinced that 
it is only by means of the Mother that we can find easy 
access to Jesus Christ, and be received into His Sacred 
Heart. 

For the same reason, we ought also to have a special 
devotion towards the Holy Family — St Joseph, St. 
Anne, and St. Joachim. For, as they loved Jesus 
Christ more ardently and more tenderly than others, 
they may be of greater use to us, in obtaining for us 
this love of tenderness, and procuring for us an entrance 
into that Sacred Heart, over which they exercise so 
great an authority. 

VI. Sixth Means. — A special devotion to St. Aloysim 
Gonzaga. 

The sixth means that we propose, and which Almighty 
God has already shown, by evident marks, to be most 
useful in obtaining a tender love for our Lord Jesus 
Christ, is devotion to St. Aloysius Gonzaga, of the 
Society of Jesus ; more illustrious still for his innocence 
and the sublime perfection of his life, than for the con- 
spicuous position which his rank in the world had 
given him. 

It is certain, that in heaven the Saints interest them- 
selves greatly, for all those who love and specially 
honour them on earth. The most ordinary grace which 
they obtain for them, is the virtue in which they them- 
selves have excelled, and which was in some degree 
their characteristic. This is what our Saint used to 
say, as was found written after his death : — " As men 
on earth are naturally more inclined to oblige those 
who have the same inclinations with themselves, Iso, in 
Heaven, the Blessed, who have excelled in some par- 
ticular virtue, are pleased to employ their credit with 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



107 



God, in favour of those who have a particular attraction 
for the same virtue, and who labour in earnest to 

acquire it " 

Now, as the devotion to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, 
in the exercise of an interior life, and continual union 
with God, was the distinguishing characteristic of St. 
Aloysius Gonzaga, it cannot be doubted but that he 
interests himself in a particular manner for those who 
have this devotion greatly at heart. Many persons 
have happily experienced the powerful effects of his 
intercession in this point. It might be said, that no 
one can be truly devout to him, without feeling at once 
a real tenderness for Jesus Christ. Devotion to him 
inspires a high esteem and love for the interior life. 
There seem to be few Saints whom we can propose 
more universally than St. Aloysius, to all sorts of per- 
sons, as a model for attaining easily, in the exercise of 
an ordinary life, solid and exalted virtue. To judge of 
his actions, we find nothing, so far as the exterior is 
concerned, extraordinary in his life. He died young, 
and never held any high office. Nor did he distinguish 
himself by any wonderful actions, but, on the contrary, 
he was extremely careful to remain hidden. Never- 
theless, the sublime degree of glory to which he is 
raised, can be nothing but the reward of great merit ; 
and this great merit can only be the fruit of extreme 
purity of heart, an interior life, living continually in 
the presence of God, a most tender and ardent love of 
Jesus Christ — in fine, of a consummate perfection, 
which he acquired in a few years, by the excessive love 
and tender devotion which he always had towards Jesus 
Christ in the most Blessed Sacrament. Nor was it 
without a special providence of God, that this faithful 
servant of Jesus Christ died as he had predicted and 
desired, on the day which is appointed for the Feast of 
the Sacred Heart, to which he had always been so 
devout. It was in this adorable Heart, so to speak, 



Digitized by Google 



108 



SECOND PART. 



that he received, from his childhood, the grace of most 
sublime contemplation, and a continual gift of tears. 
So abundant were these tears, especially at Mass, 
immediately after the Consecration, that his garments 
were all wet with them. From the same source sprung 
the extreme tranquillity of heart, which he preserved 
unaltered amidst all the events and all the occupations 
of his life. Finally, from this Sacred Heart, says the 
historian of his life, his soul was filled with such 
ardour and such sweet consolation, that his coun- 
tenance appeared all on fire, and his heart palpitated 
so excessively, that it seemed as if it would burst from 
its place. Here he united himself so intimately with 
God, that, when he was obliged for any reason to dis- 
tract himself from this union, his heart felt a pain like 
that which is felt when a limb of the body is dislocated, 
as he himself attested. " I do not know how it is," he 
would sometimes say, "I am forbidden to apply my 
mind to God, lest this application should injure my 
head. But the effort I make not to apply, does me 
more harm than the application itself. For it has 
become a habit with me, and I find it no longer a 
labour, but sweetness and repose. I will, however, 
try to obey in the best manner I can." But, to form 
some idea of the sublime degree of glory which he 
enjoys in Heaven, and which we may consider to be 
the fruit of his interior life, and of his most ardent and 
tender love for the adorable Heart of Jesus Christ, it 
is enough to read what St. Mary Magdalen of Pazzi 
4 has said of it. Hear what is related by the author of 
the life of this Saint. 

"In the year 1600, on the 4th of April, the Saint, 
being in one of her accustomed raptures, saw in Heaven 
the glory of St. Aloysius Gonzaga, of the Society of 
Jesus, and surprised at the extraordinary sight, she 
began to speak, pausing between her words from time 
to time. « 0 how great is the glory of Aloysius, the son 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV. 



109 



of Ignatius! I could never have believed it, if our 
IiOrd had not shown it to me. It seems to me that 
there can be no glory in Heaven like that of Aloysius. 
I say it again, Aloysius is a great Saint. We have 
many Saints in the Church, whom I do not believe to 
be as exalted. Would that I could go over the whole 
world, to say that Aloysius, son of Ignatius, is a great 
Saint; and would that I could show the glory he 
enjoys, that God Himself might be glorified thereby. 
He is raised to this high degree of glory, because he 
led an interior life. Who can express the price and 
value of an interior life? There is no comparison 
between the interior and the exterior. All the time 
Aloysius was upon earth, he had his eyes fixed on the 
Divine Word. Aloysius was a hidden martyr. For 
whoever knows Thee, oh my God, knows Thee to be so 
great and so amiable, that it is a great martyrdom to 
see that he does not love Thee, and that Thou art so 
far from being loved by creatures, that Thou art even 
offended by them. He was also a Martyr, because he 
knew well how to suffer. Oh how Aloysius loved upon 
earth ! It is for this that he now enjoys God in Heaven 
with so great a plenitude of love. Whilst he was in 
this mortal life, he continually shot forth darts of love 
into the Heart of the Eternal Word. Now that he is 
in Heaven, these darts return into his own heart, and 
remain fixed there ; for the acts of love and charity, 
which he then made, caused him extreme delight.'" 
Such are the Saint's own words. 

It is easy to recognize in this description, the exact 
portrait of one, truly and perfectly devout to the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus Christ. Those who sincerely desire to 
become so, and to obtain a love of tenderness for Jesus 
Christ, and the gift of an interior life, and of living 
continually in the presence of God, should have a 
tender devotion to this great Saint. He will make 
them soon feel the sweet effects of his intercession with 



Digitized by Google 



110 



SECOND PART. 



Jesus and Mary, whom he loved with so much ardour 
and tenderness, and by Whom he was so tenderly 
loved. 

On this account the Nuns of the Convent of the 
Angels at Florence, besides a daily devotion to this 
great Saint, celebrate his feast annually in their Con- 
vent, in the most solemn manner, to obtain by his 
intercession this interior recollection, continual union 
with God, most ardent and tender love of Jesus Christ, 
and perfect devotion to His Sacred Heart. 

VII.— A Day of Retreat every Month. 

The seventh and last means for acquiring and pre- 
serving this ardent love of Jesus Christ is so useful 
and necessary, that we may say that without it, all the 
others which have been proposed are but of little avail. 
However sincere may be our will to have an ardent 
love for Jesus Christ, we require to renew from time to 
time the reflections from which it took its rise. There 
is not a more suitable means for renewing, from time 
to time, these salutary reflections, and with them the 
fervour that is their ordinary fruit, than by making a 
day's Retreat every month. For this purpose it is not 
necessary that we should seek solitude elsewhere than 
in our own house. We may even make this retreat 
without interrupting our ordinary business, or omitting 
the smallest obligations of our state. * All that is re- 
quired is that we withdraw ourselves, for a day, from 
some kind of amusement, from some unnecessary visit, 
in order to examine whether we have relaxed in the 
practice of virtue, whether we fulfil with punctuality 
the least duties of our state, whether we have more 
love and gratitude towards Jesus Christ, whether we 
make any progress in virtue, and what fruit we draw 
from the use of the Sacraments. 

The manner of making this Retreat will be found in 
the book we have referred to above. Meditations for 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER IV." 



Ill 



each month on the most important truths of faith are 
given there at length, with the considerations that may 
be made each day. It seems to me there cannot be a 
more effectual means for continually advancing in 
virtue. One day in the month is all that is required. 
We are at liberty to choose whatever day is most 
convenient. We must indeed have but little love for 
Jesus Christ, if we refuse to consecrate to Him at least 
one day in each month. 



END OF THE SECOND PART. 



Digitized by Google 



112 



THIRD PART. — PRACTICE. 



Chapter I. 

What are the motives and sentiments with which we should 
practise this devotion. 

As the sanctity and merit of our actions depends on 
the motive and spirit with which they are actuated, 
the practice of the devotion to the Sacred Heart of 
Jesus, however holy, would be of little use, unless it 
were animated with the spirit and the motive which 
gives it all its value. This motive, as we have said, is 
to repair, as far as possible, by our love, our adoration, 
and by every kind of homage the indignities and out- 
rages which Jesus Christ has endured, and still daily 
endures, in the most blessed Sacrament. It is in this 
spirit, and in these sentiments, the devotion should be 
practised. 

But as it may not always be convenient to read over 
what has been said on this subject, in various parts of 
this book, and as it is not always easy to remember 
what we have read, I have thought it well to recapitu- 
late in the beginning of this part, the principal reflec- 
tions which may help to inspire us with this spirit and 
these sentiments. We shall perhaps be obliged to 
repeat much that we have said before, but I have 
thought it weD to make these repetitions in order to 
render the practice of the devotion- more useful and 
convenient. 

To enter, then, into the sentiments with which we 
should practise this devotion, we have only to consider 
seriously and attentively, in what manner Jesus Christ 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER I. 



118 



treats us in the adorable Eucharist, and how He is 
treated. Let us represent to ourselves the eagerness 
with which He offers us this heavenly food, and the 
disgust with which we receive it. If His love is un- 
bounded, the ingratitude with which men receive this, 
the greatest proof of His love, can go no further. Had 
it been left to our choice to ask of Jesus Christ the 
greatest proof He could give of His love for us, could 
we ever have imagined to ourselves anything so won- 
drous? Had it even entered our minds, should we 
ever have had the boldness to ask or hope for it ? 

And yet this wonder has been wrought. It is this 
means which Jesus Christ has chosen for proving to us 
the excess of His love. After having done all, and given 
everything, to show us to what a degree He loves us, 
He gives us His own Body and Blood. He gives Him- 
self in the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar. If 
He had possessed anything better or more precious, He 
would have given it to us. No place keeps Him aloof ; 
no person, however wretched he may be, disgusts Him ; 
no time obliges Him to delay. And yet so marvellous 
a condescension, so wonderful a love, which has as- 
tonished the universe, has not been able to secure Him 
from the ingratitude and outrages of mankind. The 
first Communion of all was dishonoured by the most 
horrible sacrilege. This has been succeeded by all the 
outrages and profanations that hell has been able to 
invent. All respect for Jesus Christ upon our Altars 
has been lost. He has there been treated as a mock 
king, and a false divinity. Churches in which He had 
deigned to remain continually for the love of man have 
been plundered, demolished, and burnt. The Altars, on 
which He daily immolates Himself for mankind, have 
been destroyed. The sacred vessels, which had been so 
often used in the awful sacrifice of the Mass, have been 
broken, melted, and profaned. Nay, even His Sacred 
Body, in the consecrated Host, has been dragged along 

i 



Digitized by Google 



114 



THIRD PART. 



the ground and trampled under foot. And, what might 
horrify the very devils themselves, monsters, worse 
than demons, have pierced these sacred Hosts with 
repeated blows. The miraculous Blood, which has 
often been seen to flow from them, has served only to 
increase their fury and impiety. They have cut them 
in pieces, thrown them into the flames, and as if their 
sacrilegious hands and detestable hearts were not suffi- 
ciently impure, they have thrown them to the most 
unclean aninials. In a word, they have put them to 
such execrable uses, that Thou alone, oh my God, 
couldst have endured it. The very thought fills the 
soul with horror. This is what the love of Jesus 
Christ has exposed Him to. This is the gratitude of 
men for so wondrous a gift. There is no one, however 
abject, who would not have been treated with less con- 
tempt. There is no criminal who would not have met 
with less insult, and for whom the most lively com- 
passion would not have been felt, had he been so ill- 
treated. Is Jesus Christ then to be the only one who 
is to be outraged without awakening any compassion 
in us ? Has He done us any wrong in loving us to this 
excess ? If it be a crime, pardon me the expression, 
O my God ! if it be a crime to have loved us too much, 
then is Jesus Christ guilty. But should this excess of 
love excite hatred in those who will not believe how 
much He loves us? Are we to take occasion from hence 
to forget Him, to show no respect in His presence, and 
to have no feeling for the injuries done Him ? It is 
true that the greater part of these horrible sacrileges 
are the effect of the rage of heretics. But, oh my 
Saviour, how many Catholics are there who treat Thee 
no less ill ? The abomination penetrates even into the 
sanctuary. It is difficult to say which is the most 
guilty of impiety and ingratitude, the heretic who pro- 
fanes the temples in which he does not believe Jesus 
Christ to be really present, or the Catholic who, whilst 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER I. 



115 



he professes to believe it, presents himself before Jesus 
Christ with so little respect. 

Some talk of news or of business even at the very 
foot of the Altar. Nay, we must confess it, oh my God, 
even abominable and impious conversations are held 
there. Many show a greater respect in the presence 
of well-bred persons than they do in the presence of 
Jesus Christ. What would not be tolerated in children 
at home, is allowed them in the Church. The apparel 
of our Altars is not always as clean and costly as the 
dress of many Catholics. Many Churches, owing to 
the negligence of those who have charge of them, are 
less cleanly than the commonest apartments of an or- 
dinary dwelling-house. Some assist at Mass as if they 
were at the theatre. Many are more attentive and less 
restless during a play than they are at the celebration 
of the sacred mysteries. After touching the ground 
with one knee, and doing just enough to show that 
they are not disrespectful through inadvertence, or 
from want of faith, they sit, stand up, or talk. Such 
is the homage, the love and gratitude that Jesus 
Christ receives in return from the very many of the 
faithful ! 

Priests are raised by their sublime dignity above the 
rest of men. They are obliged by their condition and 
their ministry to approach more closely and more fre- 
quently to Jesus Christ, and they are loved in a special 
manner by Him. But can it be said that all Priests 
love Jesus Christ, and that, though elevated by their 
character above the very Angels themselves, they are 
as grateful as they should be ? Does their life corre- 
spond with the sublime perfection of their state ? Jesus 
Christ has distinguished them, in His mercy, from the 
rest of the faithful. But do they distinguish themselves 
from other Christians by their virtues, and especially 
by their lively faith ? Alas, one would say, to see some 
Priests at the Altar, that the Body of Jesus Christ, 

i 2 



Digitized by Google 



116 



THIRD PART. 



Which they hold in their hands, is some mere instru- 
ment which they are using to perform some trivial 
ceremonies. As they often feel nothing but indiffer- 
ence for Jesus Christ, the time which they employ in 
offering this august sacrifice is often very short. They 
pass from some profane occupation to the Altar, and 
often from the Altar to amusements and profane em- 
ployments. Mass would seem to be some task which 
they learn to go through boldly, without thinking of it, 
and as it were from habit, by dint of going through it 
repeatedly. They hold the Body of Jesus Christ in 
their hands with as little feeling as they hold the 
Missal. This negligence, coldness, and insensibility 
show too plainly the little esteem they entertain for 
this adorable Body, or at least the incomprehensible 
blindness in which they live. If from our Lord's 
ministers we pass to the rest of the faithful, and cast 
a glance on the majority of Christians, we shall have 
no less reason to deplore our ingratitude and want of 
faith. There are, it is true, some who communicate 
frequently. But how few are the true servants of Jesus 
Christ who are to be found amongst them ? Not to 
speak of the little fruit they gain from Communion (a 
sure sign of the bad disposition in which they communi- 
cate), it is impossible to think of the little devotion with 
which they receive Jesus Christ without a deep feeling 
of indignation. We may add also to the insults offered 
to Jesus Christ by those who have so little love for 
Him, the indifference and forgetfulness of those who 
make a profession of loving Him. There is no visit 
paid with more weariness and less eagerness than the 
Visits which are paid to Jesus Christ in the adorable 
Sacrament. It is enough that the Holy Ghost invites 
us to them by His inspirations to make us at once find 
numberless excuses for exempting ourselves from them. 
If we are obliged by our state to make them more fre- 
quently, do we not on this account accustom ourselves 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER I. 



117 



to perform them with less respect ? We have only to 
observe the manner in which some enter the Church. 
They enter it as if it were a room. They present 
themselves before the Blessed Sacrament as if it were 
merely an image. Their want of modesty and respect, 
their eyes glancing in every direction, show that the 
visit to the Blessed Sacrament, with the greater num- 
ber, is little else but affectation. They make it with 
little respect, because they make it with little faith. 
These two defects destroy all the fruit. 

Thus it is, oh Lord, that the greatest of all Thy 
benefits is repaid ! This is our gratitude ! We should 
treat Jesus Christ better if He had loved us less ! Had 
He retained in the Blessed Sacrament that air of 
majesty which renders Him terrible even to the devils, 
were He to chastise on the spot those who insult His 
Divine Majesty, He would, without doubt, be more re- 
spected and feared. But Jesus Christ cannot resolve 
upon this. He prefers to expose Himself to the insults 
of the wicked, and suffer everything, rather than keep 
a single one of His children at a distance, by pardoning 
nothing. He prefers, so to speak, the outrages which 
He endures from the first to the want of confidence 
which the terror of His chastisements would create in 
the last. This very excess of goodness, which should 
of itself gain for Him the love and respect of all, ex- 
poses Him daily to fresh insults, and is the reason why 
He meets with less love. 

What can awaken our feelings if this does not ? We 
feel for a stranger whom we see cruelly treated ; we 
compassionate any poor wretch whom we see abused. 
Shall Jesus Christ be the only one to Whose sufferings 
we are insensible? Shall we look with indifference 
only on Jesus Christ, despised, outraged, ill-treated by 
all in the Blessed Sacrament? There is no outrage 
which He has not received, no injury which He has 
not suffered ; there is not a spot in the world where 



Digitized by Google 



118 



THIRD PART. 



due respect is paid Him. And all this because He has 
loved us too much. It is plain that He has loved 
us to excess. How is it that this very excess of 
love freezes the hearts of those for whom He has such 
love ? Indeed, if we have any feeling of humanity left, 
can we reflect on the derision He meets with from so 
many wicked and ungrateful men, in which number, 
perhaps, we ourselves are; can we look on Jesus 
Christ, so neglected, so little loved, so unworthily 
treated, without feeling our hearts pierced with grief ? 
Can we be contented with mere ordinary feelings of gra- 
titude? Can we fail to do all we can to repair these injuries 
by our profound adoration, our love and homage ? It is 
true the Church has instituted for this end one of the 
most solemn festivals, in which Jesus Christ is borne 
in triumph with great pomp, in order to make Him a 
reparation of honour for the many injuries He has re- 
ceived in the adorable Eucharist. But does not this 
very feast, through the disrespect and irreverence com- 
mitted throughout the Octave in the presence of the 
Blessed Sacrament, become an occasion of new insults 
to Jesus Christ ? It is on this account that our loving 
Saviour has chosen the Friday after the Octave as a 
second special feast, on which His Sacred Heart may 
be truly adored by His perfect friends. The first is the 
feast of His precious Body ; the second the feast of His 
Sacred Heart. His love for us triumphs in the first ; 
our love for Him should triumph the second. In the 
first the Church solemnly exhibits to us the excess of 
the love of Jesus Christ for us ; in the second we should 
protest, before Heaven and earth, how sincerely we love, 
Jesus Christ. 

With this view, all who have any feeling of love for 
Jesus Christ should celebrate solemnly, and with great 
care, the Feast of the Sacred Heart of Jesus. In it He 
desires to distinguish, as it were, His dearest friends, 
who love Him with a generous, grateful, and tender 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



119 



love, from those who love Him only coldly and in apr 
pearance. He desires that, full of grief for the un- 
worthy treatment He has received in the Blessed 
Sacrament, and sorrowing at the sight of so much 
ingratitude, they should make Him a reparation of 
honour, an acknowledgment of the love He has shown 
us, and an attestation of their own, by making some 
return, and consecrating the whole of this day in 
honour of the Sacred Heart. These are the senti- 
ments that should animate us in all the practices of 
this devotion. We should occupy ourselves with them 
more particularly during the visits we pay to the 
Blessed Sacrament, in time of Mass, and at Holy Com- 
munion. We have already shown, in another part of 
this work, what is the spirit in which these holy actions 
should be performed. But, as they are singularly adapt 
ted, of all exercises of piety, for honouring the Sacred 
Heart of Jesus Christ, and inflaming our hearts with 
His holy love, it has been thought well to speak of 
them a little more at length here, in the hope that 
hereby tbey may be practised with greater fervour. 
We will afterwards treat of them separately, distributed 
according . to the different times of the year, together 
with meditations adapted to this devotion. 

Chapter II. 

Visits to the Blessed Sacrament. 

I. Motives that should induce us to visit (he Blessed 
Sacrament, 

Before the coming of our Saviour, in that period of 
rigour when Almighty God would be called the aveng- 
ing God, the 6trong God, the God of armies ; when He 
only spoke, as it were, in a voice of thunder ; when 
princes and sovereigns alone were permitted to enter 
the holy place specially consecrated to Him ; when He 
exacted so respectful a worship, and punished so severely 



Digitized by Google 



120 



THIRD PART. 



the slightest faults committed against the respect due 
to Him ; when kings and priests, overcome by holy 
fear, hardly dared to enter the Temple on beholding a 
simple cloud, which was only a somewhat more sensible 
sign of God's presence in that place ; when this prodigy 
obliged the people to prostrate themselves and cry out, 
full of admiration, and with the deepest feelings of 
gratitude : " How good is the God, Whom we adore ! 
we will sing His mercies for ever, because He has 
deigned to choose Himself a dwelling amongst us : " if 
at that time what we have since witnessed could have 
been more clearly foreseen, if they had been told that 
this God, so terrible, would humble Himself so far as 
to become man for the love of men, and that, after 
dying for these very men, He would continually work 
one of the greatest miracles, in order to be with them 
even to the end of ages, would they have believed it? 

There is, however, something which would have ap- 
peared more incredible to them still. Would they ever 
have believed, that after Almighty God had humbled 
Himself in this manner, mankind would refuse to love 
Him, pay court to Him, and visit Him ? And yet this 
is what has happened. There are Christians, and those 
not a few, who consider it a trouble to pay this respect 
to Jesus Christ. And would not the disrespectful man* 
ner of the greater number of those who visit Him give 
us reason to ask the same question as our Saviour once 
asked : The Son of Man, when He cometh, shall He find, 
think you, faith on earth ? (Luke xviii. 8.) 

If this faith is not extinct, is it not more extraor- 
dinary to believe the real presence of Jesus Christ on 
our Altars, and to have no other feeling for Him than 
indifference, and to be no more eager to pay Him our 
homage than those who do not believe in His presence ? 
Civility, friendship, gratitude, and interest are usually 
the motives that induce mankind to pay visits. We 
cannot with propriety exempt ourselves from honouring 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



121 



a person distinguished for his merit, his employment, 
or his rank. Great friends part with regret, and allow 
few occasions of seeing one another to escape. We 
make at least some visits of civility to persons from 
whom we have received some service, and we are 
assiduous in our attendance upon those from whom 
we expect some benefit, or we fear some chastise- 
ment 

Does not Jesus Christ hold a sufficiently distin- 
guished place in the world to merit that court should 
be paid Him? Has Jesus Christ loved us much ? Have 
we received any benefit from Him ? Have we reason 
to expect that He will do us any service ? Since He 
will be our Judge, and since our eternal felicity or 
misery depends upon Him, have we any interest in 
gaining His favour ? It is extraordinary that on this 
subject all agree on what ought to be done, and yet no 
one takes the trouble to do what he ought. 

If it had been left to our choice to ask our divine 
Saviour for some manifest proof of His love for us, 
would it ever have occurred to us to entreat Him, 
when He was about to ascend into Heaven, to remain 
on earth with us to the end of ages ? If He Himself 
had made this offer, with what sentiments of admiration, 
respect, and gratitude should we not have accepted it ? 
Jesus Christ has granted us this signal favour. The 
excess of His love has led Him to give us this manifest 
proof of His tenderness. But His excessive love has 
only served, we may say, to make us carry our ingrati- 
tude to the highest pitch. What would be said of any 
one who rarely visited, and merely saluted in passing, 
a person of the highest rank and worth, who had come 
solely for the purpose of rendering him some service, 
and was residing for a long time in some foreign 
country, merely out of regard for him ? 

What is the motive which induced Jesus Christ to 
remain with us, after the work of our Redemption was 



Digitized by Google 



THIRD PART. 



accomplished ? After He had ascended to His Father, 
why would He return invisibly on earth ? Why does 
He remain, day and night, in an obscure and humble 
guise upon our Altars, except that He cannot, as it were, 
separate Himself from mankind, and that His delight 
is to be with them ? Be not afflicted, my children, 
He says to us, I will not leave you orphans. I am 
ascending to Heaven, but at the same time I remain on 
earth. You are weak, sick, and languishing. You will 
be often afflicted. You will fear the anger and the 
justice of My Father. But you will find in Me, in the 
Blessed Sacrament, a Father who will console you, a 
Physician who will heal you, a Guide who will conduct 
you, a Master who will solve all your doubts, a Hea- 
venly Food which will give you new strength, and 
finally, your Redeemer and your Saviour. Will not 
this be enough to move mankind, who have so much 
feeling for their own interests, and are naturally so 
strongly inclined to gratitude ? To any other person 
we should be less ungrateful, even though it were for 
smaller favours. But when it is to Jesus Christ that 
gratitude is to be shown, ingratitude ceases to be a crime* 
We abandon and forget Jesus Christ upon our Altars. 
We can always spend many hours of the day in idleness 
and in vain amusements. But if we have to find some 
time in the afternoon to visit Jesus Christ in the 
Blessed Sacrament, our employments will not admit of 
it; we have no time. Is it then so very difficult to 
perform this duty, though it is, as all allow, so just and 
reasonable ? Does it require so much time ? No : a 
quarter, or half a quarter of an hour, is enough. Very 
often we have only to take a few steps. But our want 
of love for Jesus Christ makes this visit difficult and 
inconvenient. We at once find a hundred false reasons, 
a hundred obstacles, which in any other case would 
have no weight with us, but which hold us back when 
we have something to do for Jesus Christ. Instances 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER H. 



123 



are recorded of newly-converted Christians among the 
savages in Canada, in the Indies and Japan, who have 
travelled 200 leagues to some Church, in order there 
to adore Jesus Christ. Others, who could not under- 
take so long a journey, prostrated themselves more than 
a hundred times a day in the direction in which they 
knew there was a Church. They would thus fain 
satisfy, by their repeated adorations, their desire of 
assiduously paying their court to Jesus Christ. In the 
day of judgment what answer will so many negligent 
Christians be able to make, who have only to take a 
step, as it were, to adore Jesus Christ, and yet re- 
peatedly pass by the spot where Jesus Christ resides, 
and allow whole days to elapse without visiting Him ? 
What answer will so many religious persons be able to 
make who, having Jesus Christ in their own house, 
care so little about visiting Him ? Pojndus veto mem 
obUtus est mei (Jerem. ii. 82). Those who profess to be 
wholly consecrated to My service, and whom I regard 
as My special people, even they have forgotten Me. 

Medius vestnm stetit, quern vo& neadtis (Joan. i. 26). 
We know Him not, nor do we desire to know Him, 
though day and night He is in the midst of us. He is 
our Lord and our God, Who is on our Altars expressly 
to hear our prayers, and to receive our homage. Are 
we sad, afflicted, or unhappy ? Let us have recourse 
to Jesus Christ. Let us go and lay before Him, as our 
good Father, the misfortunes that have happened to us, 
or that threaten us. Do we find it difficult to make 
some resolution ? would we see peace restored in the 
bosom of some family ? is there some one whose con- 
version we have at heart? are we tepid, inconstant, 
imperfect in God's service ? Let us run to Jesus 
Christ, let us ask Him for these graces with sim- 
plicity, with a humble and respectful familiarity, but 
above all with great confidence. Let us seek, let us 
knock, let us ask even with importunity. It is this im- 



Digitized by Google 



124 



THIRD PART. 



portunity, this confidence that gains the Heart of 
Jesus Christ. It is all powerful. Jesus Christ often 
defers granting our request merely to oblige us to visit 
Him more frequently. 

What a loss it is for Christians to neglect so easy 
and powerful a means of becoming happy and holy ! 
What remorse will so many religious persons feel at 
the hour of death, who now feel this loss so little ? 
They need not be surprised that they feel so little de- 
votion, that they go on creeping day after day in the 
path of piety, that they do not receive consolation or 
interior sweetness, that they live in uneasiness and 
melancholy, and that at last they die in remorse and 
fear. Our neglect in not frequently visiting Jesus 
Christ in the Blessed Sacrament, our dissipation of 
mind, our want of modesty and respect when we make 
these visits, are the most ordinary source of the greater 
part of our misfortunes. 

Those, on the contrary, who are faithful in visiting 
the Blessed Sacrament as often as they can, know by 
their own experience, that there is no more easy or 
certain means for obtaining all they ask for from Jesus 
Christ They know that if they only visit Him with 
faithful assiduity and respectful confidence, especially 
at certain hours of the day when few visit Him, there 
is scarcely any grace that they do not receive, but most 
especially true devotion, and a tender love of Jesus 
Christ. Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis, et onerati estis, 
et Ego reficiam vos. Come to Me all you that labour and 
are burdened, and I will refresh you (St. Matt. xi. 28). 

II. Method of Visiting the Blessed Sacrament. 

If our visits to the Blessed Sacrament should be 
frequent, they should not, on that account, be less 
respectful. We should never enter the Church but 
with the greatest modesty. We should keep our. 
selves! whilst there, in profound respect, full of sentU 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



195 



ments, of gratitude, confidence, and love. To make a 
place holy, it is enough that it is destined to honour 
Almighty God. From the moment of its solemn con- 
secration to this purpose it becomes an object of rever- 
ence to the Angels, and of terror to the devils. It is 
only just that the majesty of God, with which it is then 
in a special manner filled, and the presence of Jesus 
Christ who dwells therein, should render it still more 
an object of holy awe to men, and in a special manner 
to Christians. 

All the sanctity that the birth of Christ communi- 
cated to the stable of Bethlehem, His precious Blood to 
Calvary, and His Sacred Body to the Sepulchre, we 
find in our Churches. If, on our entering them, and 
approaching the Altar, we do not experience that holy 
fear which is felt in drawing near the holiest spots, and 
are not moved by those feelings which cause such sweet 
tears of piety to flow at the sight of the manger where 
Christ was born, or the place where He expired, it can 
proceed from nothing but a want of faith or a want of 
reflection. 

We shall remedy this evil if, before entering the 
Church, we reflect awhile on the sanctity of the place 
and the majesty of Him Whom we are going to visit. 
If it were as easy to gain an entrance into the palaces 
of the great, and to approach their persons, as it is to 
enter our Churches, how many would think themselves 
happy, who now think nothing of the happiness they 
can enjoy so easily, in approaching the adorable Person 
of Jesus Christ at any hour. 

Modesty, then, and profound respect, impressed on 
our demeanour as often as we enter a Church, are the 
visible signs of our faith. Love towards Jesus Christ 
must be, as it were, the soul of our prayers. We must 
never omit to honour and to adore, in a particular man- 
ner, the Sacred Heart of Jesus, whenever we visit the 
Blessed Sacrament It is a devotion highly pleasing 



Digitized by Google 



126 



THIRD FART. 



to Him, and it will be most profitable to those who prac- 
tise it. It is generally better, when we are before Jesus 
Christ, to speak little and meditate much. An affec- 
tionate silence, which is, as it were, the language of the 
heart, pleases Jesus Christ much more than a great 
number of vocal prayers, said with haste, and commonly 
without attention. The excessive love of Jesus Christ 
for us, His goodness, His meekness, His liberality, and 
His patience in this adorable mystery, ought to excite 
in us the tenderest affections. We should be filled 
with respect, gratitude, confidence and love of Jesus 
Christ. We should go to visit Jesus Christ as the 
angels, the shepherds, and the kings visited Him at 
His birth ; and, like them, adore Him ; or like the 
Apostles, hear Him preach; or like Magdalen, pros- 
trate at His feet, deplore our sins, or contemplate His 
adorable perfections ; or finally, like sick persons, beg 
to be healed of our infirmities. One of the reasons 
why we derive so little profit from these visits is, that 
we do not go to Jesus Christ with the simplicity and 
confidence He requires. We pass the whole time in 
some practices of devotion in which the mind has more 
share than the heart, instead of simply laying open our 
wants, infirmities, and weaknesses to Jesus Christ ; as 
the Psalmist says, pouring out our hearts before Him, in 
the language of the Prophet : Effundite coram Mo corda 
vestra (Ps. lxi. 9) ; saying to Him with the sisters of 
Lazarus : Ecce, quern amas infirmatur {J oan. xi. 8). Lord, 
behold he whom Thou lovest is sick, he for whom Thou 
hast become man, for whom Thou hast given Thy Blood, 
to whom Thou givest Thyself every day in the adorable 
Eucharist, and for the love of whom Thou remainest 
continually on this Altar, he has long laboured under 
such and such an infirmity, he wants this or that help 
or grace. Ecce quern amas infirmatur, or with the leper : 
Domine, si vis, potes me mundare: Lord, if Thou wilt, 
Thou canst make me clean (St. Luke v. 12). Why 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



127 



shouldst Thau not will it? After all Thou hast done 
for me, and after all that Thou still dost in my favour, 
can I doubt that Thou wiliest it ? And if Thou wiliest 
it, who shall have power to hinder it ? At other times, 
let us imagine to ourselves that, like Magdalen, we are 
at the feet of Jesus Christ. If we do not feel devotion 
enough to shed as many tears as she did, still let us, 
like her, remain in silence. Or, if we speak, let it be 
to express, with St. Thomas, the sentiments of admira- 
tion, respect, and love which should reign in our hearts : 
Dominus mens, et Deus meus : my Lord and my God (St. 
John xx. 28) ; repeating often with the Centurion : Credo, 
Domine, adjuva incredulitatem meam : I do believe, Lord ; 
help my unbelief (St. Mark ix. 28). We must also, like 
the Cananean woman, ask our Divine Lord, with ear- 
nestness and importunity, for all the graces we stand 
in need of. Jesus Christ loves us tenderly. He is on 
our Altars only to do us good. He can and He will do 
it. Say, then, to Him with confidence : Jems, Son of 
David, have mercy on me (St. Luke xviii. 88). Though 
He seems to reject us, and does not answer, but refuses 
everything, let us still persevere with fidelity, let us ask 
more and more earnestly ; and, as if we did not perceive 
the harsh manner in which He seems to treat us, let us 
cry out more and more, Lord, help me. It is true, we 
may add, that it is not good to take the bread of the 
children, and to cast it to the dogs, but the whelps oho eat 
of the crumbs that fall from the table of their masters. 
Treat me at least in the same manner. If we oblige 
Him by our sins not to hear our prayers, let us say to 
Him, with simplicity and confidence : " Thou hast 
solemnly engaged Thyself, oh Lord, to grant me all 
that I shall ask in Thy name. In Thy name I ask 
grace to correct myself of that imperfection which has 
so long kept me back in the path of piety, to overcome 
that ruling passion which is the source of so many 
defects, to acquire that virtue which is so necessary for 



Digitized by Google 



138 



THIRD FUBT. 



my salvation and perfection. In Thy name I beg for 
the conversion of this son, the health of a husband, the 
successful issue of this or that business, and the assist- 
ance which is necessary in such and such necessities. 
Thou knowest, oh Lord, that I labour under this defect, 
that I possess not that virtue, that I want courage in 
adversity, moderation in joy, strength in certain cir- 
cumstances, and great graces in all. Thou knowest 
that I have not a sufficiently strong faith ; my confi- 
dence sometimes wavers ; I love Thee but feebly, and 
hardly have I the desire to love Thee. Give me, then, 
oh Lord, give me all these graces, and let them be effi- 
cacious. Remember that Thou hast promised to refuse 
me nothing that I ask in Thy name. Perhaps what I 
ask is not pleasing to Thee, and Thou refusest me be- 
cause I do not know what I ask. But there is no 
danger of this, nor canst Thou reproach me thus when 
I ask for Thy perfect love. Inflame me, oh Lord, with 
this ardent love, and let it be generous, constant, and 
faithful ; a love that is rather solid than sensible and 
sweet, a love that may make me live for Thee alone. 
Give me, oh Lord, this perfect, ardent, and tender love, 
and I am satisfied : Amorem tui solum cum gratia tua 
mihi dones, et dives sum satis." 

It is good to consider sometimes what must be the 
sentiments of Jesus Christ upon the Altar on seeing 
Himself forgotten and abandoned by almost all. We 
may imagine, at the same time, that He says to us 
what He said to His Apostles for a similar reason : 
Nurnquid et vos vidtis abire ? (John vi. 68) : Will you 
oho go away ? At the same time, with the tenderest 
sentiments of love, grief, and gratitude, we must answer 
with St. Peter: Domine ad quern ibimus? verba vita 
aterruB habes (John vi. 69) : Lord, to whom shall we go ? 
Thou hast the words of eternal life ; we have believed and 
known that Thou art the Christ, the Son of God. We 
may also, in order to excite ourselves to greater love, 



Digitized by Google 



CHAPTER II. 



129 



and to force Jesus Christ, as it were, to embrace us with 
a more tender and ardent charity, represent to ourselves 
that He asks us from the Altar, as He once asked St. 
Peter : Simon Joannis, amasme? (John xxi. 17) : Simon, 
ton of John, lovest thou Me ? We must reply with the 
same Apostle : Yes, Lord, Thou knowest well that I 
love Thee ; or rather, my loving Saviour, Thou knowest 
how much I desire to love Thee. 
, It would be well, if we could detach ourselves from 
all that is not God, and often say to Him, with the 
Prophet, " Quid mihi est in cath et ate quid volui super 
terram ? Deus cordis mei et pars mea Deus in atemum V 
(Ps. lxxii. v. 25.) What have I in Heaven ? and besides 
Thee, what do I desire upon earth, but Thee, my God, 
the God of my heart, and my portion for ever! I know, 
0 Lord, that Thou art the Way, the Truth, and the 
Life. I am convinced that All who depart from Thee, 
shall perish eternally ! Quia ecce qui elongant se a te, 
peribunt. (Ps. lxxii. v. 27.) As for me, my loving 
Saviour, I find my repose, my joy, and my supreme 
felicity, only in being united with Thee, and in never 
separating myself from Thee. Mihi autem adhmrere 
Deo bonum est et ponere in Deo meo spent meam. 
(Ps. lxxii. v. 28.) In Thee, I place all my confidence. 
All my consolation would be to pass the rest of my days 
at the foot of Thy Altars. But as I cannot be there 
always in person, I will always be there in spirit. My 
treasure is upon the Altar ; my heart shall be there too. 
My heart shall be eternally united to Thy sacred Heart. 
It shall