 of all
those truths, he chooses one to himself, who saith, But the earth was
invisible, and without form, and darkness was upon the deep; that is,
"that corporeal thing that God made, was as yet a formless matter of
corporeal things, without order, without light." Another he who says,
The earth was invisible and without form, and darkness was upon the
deep; that is, "this all, which is called heaven and earth, was still
a formless and darksome matter, of which the corporeal heaven and the
corporeal earth were to be made, with all things in them, which are
known to our corporeal senses." Another he who says, The earth was
invisible and without form, and darkness was upon the deep; that is,
"this all, which is called heaven and earth, was still a formless and
a darksome matter; out of which was to be made, both that intelligible
heaven, otherwhere called the Heaven of heavens, and the earth, that is,
the whole corporeal nature, under which name is comprised this corporeal
heaven also; in a word, out of which every visible and invisible
creature was to be created." Another he who says, The earth was
invisible and without form, and darkness was upon the deep, "the
Scripture did not call that formlessness by the name of heaven and
earth; but that formlessness, saith he, already was, which he called the
earth invisible without form, and darkness upon the deep; of which
he had before said, that God had made heaven and earth, namely, the
spiritual and corporeal creature." Another he who says, The earth was
invisible and without form, and darkness was upon the deep; that is,
"there already was a certain formless matter, of which the Scripture
said before, that God made heaven and earth; namely, the whole corporeal
bulk of the world, divided into two great parts, upper and lower, with
all the common and known creatures in them."

For should any attempt to dispute against these two last opinions, thus,
"If you will not allow, that this formlessness of matter seems to be
called by the name of heaven and earth; Ergo, there was something which
God had not made, out of which to make heaven and earth; for neither
hath Scripture told us, that God made this matter, unless we understand
it to be signified by the name of heaven and earth, or of earth alone,
when it is said, In the Beginning God made the heaven and earth; that so
in what follows, and the earth was invisible and without form (although
it pleased Him so to call the formless matter), we are to understand
no other matter, but that which God made, whereof is written above, God
made heaven and earth." The maintainers of either of those two latter
opinions will, upon hearing this, return for answer, "we do not deny
this formless matter to be indeed created by God, that God of Whom are
all things, very good; for as we affirm that to be a greater good, which
is created and formed, so we confess that to be a lesser good which is
made capable of creation and form, yet still good. We say however that
Scripture hath not set down, that God made this formlessness, as also it
hath not many others; as the Cherubim, and Seraphim, and those which
the Apostle distinctly speaks of, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities,
Powers. All which that God made, is most apparent. Or if in that which
is said, He made heaven and earth, all things be comprehended, what
shall we say of the waters, upon which the Spirit of God moved? For if
they be comprised in this word earth; how then can formless matter be
meant in that name of earth, when we see the waters so beautiful? Or
if it be so taken; why then is it written, that out of the same
formlessness, the firmament was made, and called heaven; and that the
waters were made, is not written? For the waters remain not formless and
invisible, seeing we behold them flowing in so comely a manner. But if
they then received that beauty, when God said, Let the waters under the
firmament be gathered together, that so the gathering together be itself
the forming of them; what will be said as to those waters above the
firmament? Seeing neither if formless would they have been worthy of so
honourable a seat, nor is it written, by what word they were formed. If
then Genesis is silent as to God's making of any thing, which yet
that God did make neither sound faith nor well-grounded understanding
doubteth, nor again will any sober teaching dare to affirm these
waters to be coeternal with God, on the ground that we find them to be
mentioned in the hook of Genesis, but when they were created, we do
not find; why (seeing truth teaches us) should we not understand that
formless matter (which this Scripture calls the earth invisible and
without form, and darksome deep) to have been created of God out of
nothing, and therefore not to be coeternal to Him; notwithstanding this
history hath omitted to show when it was created?"

These things then being heard and perceived, according to the weakness
of my capacity (which I confess unto Thee, O Lord, that knowest it), two
sorts of disagreements I see may arise, when a thing is in words related
by true reporters; one, concerning the truth of the things, the other,
concerning the meaning of the relater. For we enquire one way about
the making of the creature, what is true; another way, what Moses,
that excellent minister of Thy Faith, would have his reader and hearer
understand by those words. For the first sort, away with all those
who imagine themselves to know as a truth, what is false; and for this
other, away with all them too, which imagine Moses to have written
things that be false. But let me be united in Thee, O Lord, with those
and delight myself in Thee, with them that feed on Thy truth, in the
largeness of charity, and let us approach together unto the words of
Thy book, and seek in them for Thy meaning, through the meaning of Thy
servant, by whose pen Thou hast dispensed them.

But which of us shall, among those so many truths, which occur to
enquirers in those words, as they are differently understood, so
discover that one meaning, as to affirm, "this Moses thought," and "this
would he have understood in that history"; with the same confidence
as he would, "this is true," whether Moses thought this or that? For
behold, O my God, I Thy servant, who have in this book vowed a sacrifice
of confession unto Thee, and pray, that by Thy mercy I may pay my vows
unto Thee, can I, with the same confidence wherewith I affirm, that in
Thy incommutable world Thou createdst all things visible and invisible,
affirm also, that Moses meant no other than this, when he wrote, In the
Beginning God made heaven and earth? No. Because I see not in his mind,
that he thought of this when he wrote these things, as I do see it
in Thy truth to be certain. For he might have his thoughts upon God's
commencement of creating, when he said In the beginning; and by heaven
and earth, in this place he might intend no formed and perfected nature
whether spiritual or corporeal, but both of them inchoate and as yet
formless. For I perceive, that whichsoever of the two had been said, it
might have been truly said; but which of the two he thought of in these
words, I do not so perceive. Although, whether it were either of these,
or any sense beside (that I have not here mentioned), which this so
great man saw in his mind, when he uttered these words, I doubt not but
that he saw it truly, and expressed it aptly.

Let no man harass me then, by saying, Moses thought not as you say, but
as I say: for if he should ask me, "How know you that Moses thought that
which you infer out of his words?" I ought to take it in good part, and
would answer perchance as I have above, or something more at large, if
he were unyielding. But when he saith, "Moses meant not what you say,
but what I say," yet denieth not that what each of us say, may both be
true, O my God, life of the poor, in Whose bosom is no contradiction,
pour down a softening dew into my heart, that I may patiently bear with
such as say this to me, not because they have a divine Spirit, and have
seen in the heart of Thy servant what they speak, but because they be
proud; not knowing Moses' opinion, but loving their own, not because it
is truth, but because it is theirs. Otherwise they would equally love
another true opinion, as I love what they say, when they say true: not
because it is theirs, but because it is true; and on that very ground
not theirs because it is true. But if they therefore love it, because
it is true, then is it both theirs, and mine; as being in common to all
lovers of truth. But whereas they contend that Moses did not mean what
I say, but what they say, this I like not, love not: for though it
were so, yet that their rashness belongs not to knowledge, but to
overboldness, and not insight but vanity was its parent. And therefore,
O Lord, are Thy judgements terrible; seeing Thy truth is neither mine,
nor his, nor another's; but belonging to us all, whom Thou callest
publicly to partake of it, warning us terribly, not to account
it private to ourselves, lest we be deprived of it. For whosoever
challenges that as proper to himself, which Thou propoundest to all to
enjoy, and would have that his own which belongs to all, is driven from
what is in common to his own; that is, from truth, to a lie. For he that
speaketh a lie, speaketh it of his own.

Hearken, O God, Thou best judge; Truth Itself, hearken to what I shall
say to this gainsayer, hearken, for before Thee do I speak, and before
my brethren, who employ Thy law lawfully, to the end of charity:
hearken and behold, if it please Thee, what I shall say to him. For this
brotherly and peaceful word do I return unto Him: "If we both see that
to be true that Thou sayest, and both see that to be true that I say,
where, I pray Thee, do we see it? Neither I in thee, nor thou in me; but
both in the unchangeable Truth itself, which is above our souls." Seeing
then we strive not about the very light of the Lord God, why strive
we about the thoughts of our neighbour which we cannot so see, as the
unchangeable Truth is seen: for that, if Moses himself had appeared to
us and said, "This I meant"; neither so should we see it, but should
believe it. Let us not then be puffed up for one against another, above
that which is written: let us love the Lord our God with all our heart,
with all our soul, and with all our mind: and our neighbour as ourself.
With a view to which two precepts of charity, unless we believe that
Moses meant, whatsoever in those books he did mean, we shall make God
a liar, imagining otherwise of our fellow servant's mind, than he hath
taught us. Behold now, how foolish it is, in such abundance of most
true meanings, as may be extracted out of those words, rashly to affirm,
which of them Moses principally meant; and with pernicious contentions
to offend charity itself, for whose sake he spake every thing, whose
words we go about to expound.

And yet I, O my God, Thou lifter up of my humility, and rest of my
labour, Who hearest my confessions, and forgivest my sins: seeing Thou
commandest me to love my neighbour as myself, I cannot believe that Thou
gavest a less gift unto Moses Thy faithful servant, than I would wish
or desire Thee to have given me, had I been born in the time he was, and
hadst Thou set me in that office, that by the service of my heart and
tongue those books might be dispensed, which for so long after were to
profit all nations, and through the whole world from such an eminence of
authority, were to surmount all sayings of false and proud teachings. I
should have desired verily, had I then been Moses (for we all come from
the same lump, and what is man, saving that Thou art mindful of him?),
I would then, had I been then what he was, and been enjoined by Thee to
write the book of Genesis, have desired such a power of expression and
such a style to be given me, that neither they who cannot yet understand
how God created, might reject the sayings, as beyond their capacity; and
they who had attained thereto, might find what true opinion soever they
had by thought arrived at, not passed over in those few words of
that Thy servant: and should another man by the light of truth have
discovered another, neither should that fail of being discoverable in
those same words.

For as a fountain within a narrow compass, is more plentiful, and
supplies a tide for more streams over larger spaces, than any one of
those streams, which, after a wide interval, is derived from the same
fountain; so the relation of that dispenser of Thine, which was to
benefit many who were to discourse thereon, does out of a narrow
scantling of language, overflow into streams of clearest truth, whence
every man may draw out for himself such truth as he can upon these
subjects, one, one truth, another, another, by larger circumlocutions of
discourse. For some, when they read, or hear these words, conceive that
God like a man or some mass endued with unbounded power, by some new
and sudden resolution, did, exterior to itself, as it were at a certain
distance, create heaven and earth, two great bodies above and below,
wherein all things were to be contained. And when they hear, God said,
Let it be made, and it was made; they conceive of words begun and ended,
sounding in time, and passing away; after whose departure, that came
into being, which was commanded so to do; and whatever of the like sort,
men's acquaintance with the material world would suggest. In whom, being
yet little ones and carnal, while their weakness is by this humble
kind of speech, carried on, as in a mother's bosom, their faith is
wholesomely built up, whereby they hold assured, that God made all
natures, which in admirable variety their eye beholdeth around. Which
words, if any despising, as too simple, with a proud weakness, shall
stretch himself beyond the guardian nest; he will, alas, fall miserably.
Have pity, O Lord God, lest they who go by the way trample on the
unfledged bird, and send Thine angel to replace it into the nest, that
it may live, till it can fly.

But others, unto whom these words are no longer a nest, but deep shady
fruit-bowers, see the fruits concealed therein, fly joyously around,
and with cheerful notes seek out, and pluck them. For reading or hearing
these words, they see that all times past and to come, are surpassed by
Thy eternal and stable abiding; and yet that there is no creature formed
in time, not of Thy making. Whose will, because it is the same that Thou
art, Thou madest all things, not by any change of will, nor by a will,
which before was not, and that these things were not out of Thyself, in
Thine own likeness, which is the form of all things; but out of nothing,
a formless unlikeness, which should be formed by Thy likeness (recurring
to Thy Unity, according to their appointed capacity, so far as is given
to each thing in his kind), and might all be made very good; whether
they abide around Thee, or being in gradation removed in time and place,
made or undergo the beautiful variations of the Universe. These things
they see, and rejoice, in the little degree they here may, in the light
of Thy truth.

Another bends his mind on that which is said, In the Beginning God made
heaven and earth; and beholdeth therein Wisdom, the Beginning because
It also speaketh unto us. Another likewise bends his mind on the same
words, and by Beginning understands the commencement of things created;
In the beginning He made, as if it were said, He at first made. And
among them that understand In the Beginning to mean, "In Thy Wisdom Thou
createdst heaven and earth," one believes the matter out of which the
heaven and earth were to be created, to be there called heaven and
earth; another, natures already formed and distinguished; another, one
formed nature, and that a spiritual, under the name Heaven, the other
formless, a corporeal matter, under the name Earth. They again who by
the names heaven and earth, understand matter as yet formless, out of
which heaven and earth were to be formed, neither do they understand it
in one way; but the one, that matter out of which both the intelligible
and the sensible creature were to be perfected; another, that only, out
of which this sensible corporeal mass was to be made, containing in
its vast bosom these visible and ordinary natures. Neither do they, who
believe the creatures already ordered and arranged, to be in this place
called heaven and earth, understand the same; but the one, both the
invisible and visible, the other, the visible only, in which we behold
this lightsome heaven, and darksome earth, with the things in them
contained.

But he that no otherwise understands In the Beginning He made, than if
it were said, At first He made, can only truly understand heaven and
earth of the matter of heaven and earth, that is, of the universal
intelligible and corporeal creation. For if he would understand thereby
the universe, as already formed, it may be rightly demanded of him, "If
God made this first, what made He afterwards?" and after the universe,
he will find nothing; whereupon must he against his will hear another
question; "How did God make this first, if nothing after?" But when
he says, God made matter first formless, then formed, there is no
absurdity, if he be but qualified to discern, what precedes by eternity,
what by time, what by choice, and what in original. By eternity, as
God is before all things; by time, as the flower before the fruit; by
choice, as the fruit before the flower; by original, as the sound before
the tune. Of these four, the first and last mentioned, are with extreme
difficulty understood, the two middle, easily. For a rare and too lofty
a vision is it, to behold Thy Eternity, O Lord, unchangeably making
things changeable; and thereby before them. And who, again, is of
so sharp-sighted understanding, as to be able without great pains to
discern, how the sound is therefore before the tune; because a tune is
a formed sound; and a thing not formed, may exist; whereas that which
existeth not, cannot be formed. Thus is the matter before the thing
made; not because it maketh it, seeing itself is rather made; nor is it
before by interval of time; for we do not first in time utter formless
sounds without singing, and subsequently adapt or fashion them into
the form of a chant, as wood or silver, whereof a chest or vessel is
fashioned. For such materials do by time also precede the forms of the
things made of them, but in singing it is not so; for when it is sung,
its sound is heard; for there is not first a formless sound, which is
afterwards formed into a chant. For each sound, so soon as made, passeth
away, nor canst thou find ought to recall and by art to compose. So
then the chant is concentrated in its sound, which sound of his is his
matter. And this indeed is formed, that it may be a tune; and therefore
(as I said) the matter of the sound is before the form of the tune; not
before, through any power it hath to make it a tune; for a sound is no
way the workmaster of the tune; but is something corporeal, subjected to
the soul which singeth, whereof to make a tune. Nor is it first in time;
for it is given forth together with the tune; nor first in choice, for
a sound is not better than a tune, a tune being not only a sound, but
a beautiful sound. But it is first in original, because a tune receives
not form to become a sound, but a sound receives a form to become a
tune. By this example, let him that is able, understand how the matter
of things was first made, and called heaven and earth, because heaven
and earth were made out of it. Yet was it not made first in time;
because the forms of things give rise to time; but that was without
form, but now is, in time, an object of sense together with its form.
And yet nothing can be related of that matter, but as though prior in
time, whereas in value it is last (because things formed are superior
to things without form) and is preceded by the Eternity of the Creator:
that so there might be out of nothing, whereof somewhat might be
created.

In this diversity of the true opinions, let Truth herself produce
concord. And our God have mercy upon us, that we may use the law
lawfully, the end of the commandment, pure charity. By this if man
demands of me, "which of these was the meaning of Thy servant Moses";
this were not the language of my Confessions, should I not confess unto
Thee, "I know not"; and yet I know that those senses are true, those
carnal ones excepted, of which I have spoken what seemed necessary. And
even those hopeful little ones who so think, have this benefit, that the
words of Thy Book affright them not, delivering high things lowlily,
and with few words a copious meaning. And all we who, I confess, see and
express the truth delivered in those words, let us love one another, and
jointly love Thee our God, the fountain of truth, if we are athirst for
it, and not for vanities; yea, let us so honour this Thy servant, the
dispenser of this Scripture, full of Thy Spirit, as to believe that,
when by Thy revelation he wrote these things, he intended that, which
among them chiefly excels both for light of truth, and fruitfulness of
profit.

So when one says, "Moses meant as I do"; and another, "Nay, but as I
do," I suppose that I speak more reverently, "Why not rather as both,
if both be true?" And if there be a third, or a fourth, yea if any other
seeth any other truth in those words, why may not he be believed to
have seen all these, through whom the One God hath tempered the holy
Scriptures to the senses of many, who should see therein things true but
divers? For I certainly (and fearlessly I speak it from my heart), that
were I to indite any thing to have supreme authority, I should prefer
so to write, that whatever truth any could apprehend on those matters,
might be conveyed in my words, rather than set down my own meaning so
clearly as to exclude the rest, which not being false, could not offend
me. I will not therefore, O my God, be so rash, as not to believe, that
Thou vouchsafedst as much to that great man. He without doubt, when he
wrote those words, perceived and thought on what truth soever we have
been able to find, yea and whatsoever we have not been able, nor yet
are, but which may be found in them.

Lastly, O Lord, who art God and not flesh and blood, if man did see
less, could any thing be concealed from Thy good Spirit (who shall lead
me into the land of uprightness), which Thou Thyself by those words wert
about to reveal to readers in times to come, though he through whom
they were spoken, perhaps among many true meanings, thought on some one?
which if so it be, let that which he thought on be of all the highest.
But to us, O Lord, do Thou, either reveal that same, or any other true
one which Thou pleasest; that so, whether Thou discoverest the same to
us, as to that Thy servant, or some other by occasion of those words,
yet Thou mayest feed us, not error deceive us. Behold, O Lord my God,
how much we have written upon a few words, how much I beseech Thee! What
strength of ours, yea what ages would suffice for all Thy books in this
manner? Permit me then in these more briefly to confess unto Thee, and
to choose some one true, certain, and good sense that Thou shalt inspire
me, although many should occur, where many may occur; this being the law
my confession, that if I should say that which Thy minister intended,
that is right and best; for this should I endeavour, which if I should
not attain, yet I should say that, which Thy Truth willed by his words
to tell me, which revealed also unto him, what It willed.




BOOK XIII


I call upon Thee, O my God, my mercy, Who createdst me, and forgottest
not me, forgetting Thee. I call Thee into my soul which, by the longing
Thyself inspirest into her, Thou preparest for Thee. Forsake me not now
calling upon Thee, whom Thou preventedst before I called, and urgedst me
with much variety of repeated calls, that I would hear Thee from afar,
and be converted, and call upon Thee, that calledst after me; for Thou,
Lord, blottedst out all my evil deservings, so as not to repay into my
hands, wherewith I fell from Thee; and Thou hast prevented all my well
deservings, so as to repay the work of Thy hands wherewith Thou madest
me; because before I was, Thou wert; nor was I any thing, to which
Thou mightest grant to be; and yet behold, I am, out of Thy goodness,
preventing all this which Thou hast made me, and whereof Thou hast made
me. For neither hadst Thou need of me, nor am I any such good, as to be
helpful unto Thee, my Lord and God; not in serving Thee, as though Thou
wouldest tire in working; or lest Thy power might be less, if lacking
my service: nor cultivating Thy service, as a land, that must remain
uncultivated, unless I cultivated Thee: but serving and worshipping
Thee, that I might receive a well-being from Thee, from whom it comes,
that I have a being capable of well-being.

For of the fulness of Thy goodness, doth Thy creature subsist, that so
a good, which could no ways profit Thee, nor was of Thee (lest so it
should be equal to Thee), might yet be since it could be made of Thee.
For what did heaven and earth, which Thou madest in the Beginning,
deserve of Thee? Let those spiritual and corporeal natures which Thou
madest in Thy Wisdom, say wherein they deserved of Thee, to depend
thereon (even in that their several inchoate and formless state, whether
spiritual or corporeal, ready to fall away into an immoderate liberty
and far-distant unlikeliness unto Thee;--the spiritual, though without
form, superior to the corporeal though formed, and the corporeal though
without form, better than were it altogether nothing), and so to depend
upon Thy Word, as formless, unless by the same Word they were brought
back to Thy Unity, indued with form and from Thee the One Sovereign
Good were made all very good. How did they deserve of Thee, to be even
without form, since they had not been even this, but from Thee?

How did corporeal matter deserve of Thee, to be even invisible and
without form? seeing it were not even this, but that Thou madest it, and
therefore because it was not, could not deserve of Thee to be made. Or
how could the inchoate spiritual creature deserve of Thee, even to ebb
and flow darksomely like the deep,--unlike Thee, unless it had been
by the same Word turned to that, by Whom it was created, and by Him so
enlightened, become light; though not equally, yet conformably to that
Form which is equal unto Thee? For as in a body, to be, is not one with
being beautiful, else could it not be deformed; so likewise to a created
spirit to live, is not one with living wisely; else should it be wise
unchangeably. But good it is for it always to hold fast to Thee; lest
what light it hath obtained by turning to Thee, it lose by turning
from Thee, and relapse into life resembling the darksome deep. For we
ourselves also, who as to the soul are a spiritual creature, turned away
from Thee our light, were in that life sometimes darkness; and still
labour amidst the relics of our