 form and nothing, neither
formed, nor nothing, a formless almost nothing. So my mind gave over to
question thereupon with my spirit, it being filled with the images of
formed bodies, and changing and varying them, as it willed; and I bent
myself to the bodies themselves, and looked more deeply into their
changeableness, by which they cease to be what they have been, and begin
to be what they were not; and this same shifting from form to form, I
suspected to be through a certain formless state, not through a mere
nothing; yet this I longed to know, not to suspect only.-If then my
voice and pen would confess unto Thee the whole, whatsoever knots Thou
didst open for me in this question, what reader would hold out to take
in the whole? Nor shall my heart for all this cease to give Thee honour,
and a song of praise, for those things which it is not able to express.
For the changeableness of changeable things, is itself capable of all
those forms, into which these changeable things are changed. And this
changeableness, what is it? Is it soul? Is it body? Is it that which
constituteth soul or body? Might one say, "a nothing something", an
"is, is not," I would say, this were it: and yet in some way was it even
then, as being capable of receiving these visible and compound figures.

But whence had it this degree of being, but from Thee, from Whom are all
things, so far forth as they are? But so much the further from Thee, as
the unliker Thee; for it is not farness of place. Thou therefore,
Lord, Who art not one in one place, and otherwise in another, but the
Self-same, and the Self-same, and the Self-same, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord
God Almighty, didst in the Beginning, which is of Thee, in Thy Wisdom,
which was born of Thine own Substance, create something, and that out of
nothing. For Thou createdst heaven and earth; not out of Thyself, for so
should they have been equal to Thine Only Begotten Son, and thereby to
Thee also; whereas no way were it right that aught should be equal to
Thee, which was not of Thee. And aught else besides Thee was there not,
whereof Thou mightest create them, O God, One Trinity, and Trine Unity;
and therefore out of nothing didst Thou create heaven and earth; a great
thing, and a small thing; for Thou art Almighty and Good, to make all
things good, even the great heaven, and the petty earth. Thou wert, and
nothing was there besides, out of which Thou createdst heaven and earth;
things of two sorts; one near Thee, the other near to nothing; one to
which Thou alone shouldest be superior; the other, to which nothing
should be inferior.

But that heaven of heavens was for Thyself, O Lord; but the earth which
Thou gavest to the sons of men, to be seen and felt, was not such as we
now see and feel. For it was invisible, without form, and there was a
deep, upon which there was no light; or, darkness was above the deep,
that is, more than in the deep. Because this deep of waters, visible
now, hath even in his depths, a light proper for its nature; perceivable
in whatever degree unto the fishes, and creeping things in the bottom
of it. But that whole deep was almost nothing, because hitherto it
was altogether without form; yet there was already that which could be
formed. For Thou, Lord, madest the world of a matter without form, which
out of nothing, Thou madest next to nothing, thereof to make those
great things, which we sons of men wonder at. For very wonderful is this
corporeal heaven; of which firmament between water and water, the second
day, after the creation of light, Thou saidst, Let it be made, and it
was made. Which firmament Thou calledst heaven; the heaven, that is, to
this earth and sea, which Thou madest the third day, by giving a visible
figure to the formless matter, which Thou madest before all days. For
already hadst Thou made both an heaven, before all days; but that was
the heaven of this heaven; because In the beginning Thou hadst made
heaven and earth. But this same earth which Thou madest was formless
matter, because it was invisible and without form, and darkness was
upon the deep, of which invisible earth and without form, of which
formlessness, of which almost nothing, Thou mightest make all these
things of which this changeable world consists, but subsists not; whose
very changeableness appears therein, that times can be observed and
numbered in it. For times are made by the alterations of things, while
the figures, the matter whereof is the invisible earth aforesaid, are
varied and turned.

And therefore the Spirit, the Teacher of Thy servant, when It recounts
Thee to have In the Beginning created heaven and earth, speaks nothing
of times, nothing of days. For verily that heaven of heavens which
Thou createdst in the Beginning, is some intellectual creature, which,
although no ways coeternal unto Thee, the Trinity, yet partaketh of
Thy eternity, and doth through the sweetness of that most happy
contemplation of Thyself, strongly restrain its own changeableness; and
without any fall since its first creation, cleaving close unto Thee, is
placed beyond all the rolling vicissitude of times. Yea, neither is this
very formlessness of the earth, invisible, and without form, numbered
among the days. For where no figure nor order is, there does nothing
come, or go; and where this is not, there plainly are no days, nor any
vicissitude of spaces of times.

O let the Light, the Truth, the Light of my heart, not mine own
darkness, speak unto me. I fell off into that, and became darkened; but
even thence, even thence I loved Thee. I went astray, and remembered
Thee. I heard Thy voice behind me, calling to me to return, and scarcely
heard it, through the tumultuousness of the enemies of peace. And now,
behold, I return in distress and panting after Thy fountain. Let no man
forbid me! of this will I drink, and so live. Let me not be mine own
life; from myself I lived ill, death was I to myself; and I revive in
Thee. Do Thou speak unto me, do Thou discourse unto me. I have believed
Thy Books, and their words be most full of mystery.

Already Thou hast told me with a strong voice, O Lord, in my inner ear,
that Thou art eternal, Who only hast immortality; since Thou canst not
be changed as to figure or motion, nor is Thy will altered by times:
seeing no will which varies is immortal. This is in Thy sight clear to
me, and let it be more and more cleared to me, I beseech Thee; and in
the manifestation thereof, let me with sobriety abide under Thy wings.
Thou hast told me also with a strong voice, O Lord, in my inner ear,
that Thou hast made all natures and substances, which are not what
Thyself is, and yet are; and that only is not from Thee, which is not,
and the motion of the will from Thee who art, unto that which in a less
degree is, because such motion is transgression and sin; and that no
man's sin doth either hurt Thee, or disturb the order of Thy government,
first or last. This is in Thy sight clear unto me, and let it be
more and more cleared to me, I beseech Thee: and in the manifestation
thereof, let me with sobriety abide under Thy wings.

Thou hast told me also with a strong voice, in my inner ear, that
neither is that creature coeternal unto Thyself, whose happiness
Thou only art, and which with a most persevering purity, drawing its
nourishment from Thee, doth in no place and at no time put forth its
natural mutability; and, Thyself being ever present with it, unto Whom
with its whole affection it keeps itself, having neither future to
expect, nor conveying into the past what it remembereth, is neither
altered by any change, nor distracted into any times. O blessed
creature, if such there be, for cleaving unto Thy Blessedness; blest in
Thee, its eternal Inhabitant and its Enlightener! Nor do I find by what
name I may the rather call the heaven of heavens which is the Lord's,
than Thine house, which contemplateth Thy delights without any defection
of going forth to another; one pure mind, most harmoniously one, by that
settled estate of peace of holy spirits, the citizens of Thy city in
heavenly places; far above those heavenly places that we see.

By this may the soul, whose pilgrimage is made long and far away, by
this may she understand, if she now thirsts for Thee, if her tears be
now become her bread, while they daily say unto her, Where is Thy God?
if she now seeks of Thee one thing, and desireth it, that she may dwell
in Thy house all the days of her life (and what is her life, but Thou?
and what Thy days, but Thy eternity, as Thy years which fail not,
because Thou art ever the same?); by this then may the soul that is
able, understand how far Thou art, above all times, eternal; seeing
Thy house which at no time went into a far country, although it be not
coeternal with Thee, yet by continually and unfailingly cleaving unto
Thee, suffers no changeableness of times. This is in Thy sight clear
unto me, and let it be more and more cleared unto me, I beseech Thee,
and in the manifestation thereof, let me with sobriety abide under Thy
wings.

There is, behold, I know not what formlessness in those changes of these
last and lowest creatures; and who shall tell me (unless such a one as
through the emptiness of his own heart, wonders and tosses himself up
and down amid his own fancies?), who but such a one would tell me, that
if all figure be so wasted and consumed away, that there should only
remain that formlessness, through which the thing was changed and turned
from one figure to another, that that could exhibit the vicissitudes
of times? For plainly it could not, because, without the variety of
motions, there are no times: and no variety, where there is no figure.

These things considered, as much as Thou givest, O my God, as much
as Thou stirrest me up to knock, and as much as Thou openest to me
knocking, two things I find that Thou hast made, not within the compass
of time, neither of which is coeternal with Thee. One, which is so
formed, that without any ceasing of contemplation, without any interval
of change, though changeable, yet not changed, it may thoroughly enjoy
Thy eternity and unchangeableness; the other which was so formless,
that it had not that, which could be changed from one form into another,
whether of motion, or of repose, so as to become subject unto time. But
this Thou didst not leave thus formless, because before all days, Thou
in the Beginning didst create Heaven and Earth; the two things that I
spake of. But the Earth was invisible and without form, and darkness
was upon the deep. In which words, is the formlessness conveyed unto us
(that such capacities may hereby be drawn on by degrees, as are not
able to conceive an utter privation of all form, without yet coming to
nothing), out of which another Heaven might be created, together with
a visible and well-formed earth: and the waters diversly ordered, and
whatsoever further is in the formation of the world, recorded to have
been, not without days, created; and that, as being of such nature, that
the successive changes of times may take place in them, as being subject
to appointed alterations of motions and of forms.

This then is what I conceive, O my God, when I hear Thy Scripture
saying, In the beginning God made Heaven and Earth: and the Earth was
invisible and without form, and darkness was upon the deep, and not
mentioning what day Thou createdst them; this is what I conceive, that
because of the Heaven of heavens,--that intellectual Heaven, whose
Intelligences know all at once, not in part, not darkly, not through a
glass, but as a whole, in manifestation, face to face; not, this thing
now, and that thing anon; but (as I said) know all at once, without any
succession of times;--and because of the earth invisible and without
form, without any succession of times, which succession presents "this
thing now, that thing anon"; because where is no form, there is
no distinction of things:--it is, then, on account of these two, a
primitive formed, and a primitive formless; the one, heaven but the
Heaven of heaven, the other earth but the earth invisible and without
form; because of these two do I conceive, did Thy Scripture say without
mention of days, In the Beginning God created Heaven and Earth. For
forthwith it subjoined what earth it spake of; and also, in that the
Firmament is recorded to be created the second day, and called Heaven,
it conveys to us of which Heaven He before spake, without mention of
days.

Wondrous depth of Thy words! whose surface, behold! is before us,
inviting to little ones; yet are they a wondrous depth. O my God, a
wondrous depth! It is awful to look therein; an awfulness of honour, and
a trembling of love. The enemies thereof I hate vehemently; oh that Thou
wouldest slay them with Thy two-edged sword, that they might no longer
be enemies unto it: for so do I love to have them slain unto themselves,
that they may live unto Thee. But behold others not faultfinders, but
extollers of the book of Genesis; "The Spirit of God," say they, "Who
by His servant Moses wrote these things, would not have those words
thus understood; He would not have it understood, as thou sayest, but
otherwise, as we say." Unto Whom Thyself, O Thou God all, being judge,
do I thus answer.

"Will you affirm that to be false, which with a strong voice Truth tells
me in my inner ear, concerning the Eternity of the Creator, that His
substance is no ways changed by time, nor His will separate from His
substance? Wherefore He willeth not one thing now, another anon, but
once, and at once, and always, He willeth all things that He willeth;
not again and again, nor now this, now that; nor willeth afterwards,
what before He willed not, nor willeth not, what before He willed;
because such a will is and no mutable thing is eternal: but our God is
eternal. Again, what He tells me in my inner ear, the expectation of
things to come becomes sight, when they are come, and this same sight
becomes memory, when they be past. Now all thought which thus varies is
mutable; and no mutable thing is eternal: but our God is eternal." These
things I infer, and put together, and find that my God, the eternal God,
hath not upon any new will made any creature, nor doth His knowledge
admit of any thing transitory. "What will ye say then, O ye gainsayers?
Are these things false?" "No," they say; "What then? Is it false, that
every nature already formed, or matter capable of form, is not, but from
Him Who is supremely good, because He is supremely?" "Neither do we deny
this," say they. "What then? do you deny this, that there is a certain
sublime creature, with so chaste a love cleaving unto the true and
truly eternal God, that although not coeternal with Him, yet is it not
detached from Him, nor dissolved into the variety and vicissitude of
times, but reposeth in the most true contemplation of Him only?" Because
Thou, O God, unto him that loveth Thee so much as Thou commandest, dost
show Thyself, and sufficest him; and therefore doth he not decline
from Thee, nor toward himself. This is the house of God, not of earthly
mould, nor of celestial bulk corporeal but spiritual, and partaker of
Thy eternity, because without defection for ever. For Thou hast made
it fast for ever and ever, Thou hast given it a law which it shall not
pass. Nor yet is it coeternal with Thee, O God, because not without
beginning; for it was made.

For although we find no time before it, for wisdom was created before
all things; not that Wisdom which is altogether equal and coeternal unto
Thee, our God, His Father, and by Whom all things were created, and in
Whom, as the Beginning, Thou createdst heaven and earth; but that
wisdom which is created, that is, the intellectual nature, which by
contemplating the light, is light. For this, though created, is also
called wisdom. But what difference there is betwixt the Light which
enlighteneth, and which is enlightened, so much is there betwixt the
Wisdom that createth, and that created; as betwixt the Righteousness
which justifieth, and the righteousness which is made by justification.
For we also are called Thy righteousness; for so saith a certain
servant of Thine, That we might be made the righteousness of God in Him.
Therefore since a certain created wisdom was created before all things,
the rational and intellectual mind of that chaste city of Thine, our
mother which is above, and is free and eternal in the heavens (in
what heavens, if not in those that praise Thee, the Heaven of heavens?
Because this is also the Heaven of heavens for the Lord);--though we
find no time before it (because that which hath been created before all
things, precedeth also the creature of time), yet is the Eternity of
the Creator Himself before it, from Whom, being created, it took the
beginning, not indeed of time (for time itself was not yet), but of its
creation.

Hence it is so of Thee, our God, as to be altogether other than Thou,
and not the Self-same: because though we find time neither before it,
nor even in it (it being meet ever to behold Thy face, nor is ever drawn
away from it, wherefore it is not varied by any change), yet is there in
it a liability to change, whence it would wax dark, and chill, but
that by a strong affection cleaving unto Thee, like perpetual noon, it
shineth and gloweth from Thee. O house most lightsome and delightsome!
I have loved thy beauty, and the place of the habitation of the glory
of my Lord, thy builder and possessor. Let my wayfaring sigh after thee,
and I say to Him that made thee, let Him take possession of me also in
thee, seeing He hath made me likewise. I have gone astray like a lost
sheep: yet upon the shoulders of my Shepherd, thy builder, hope I to be
brought back to thee.

"What say ye to me, O ye gainsayers that I was speaking unto, who yet
believe Moses to have been the holy servant of God, and his books the
oracles of the Holy Ghost? Is not this house of God, not coeternal
indeed with God, yet after its measure, eternal in the heavens, when you
seek for changes of times in vain, because you will not find them? For
that, to which it is ever good to cleave fast to God, surpasses all
extension, and all revolving periods of time." "It is," say they.
"What then of all that which my heart loudly uttered unto my God, when
inwardly it heard the voice of His praise, what part thereof do you
affirm to be false? Is it that the matter was without form, in which
because there was no form, there was no order? But where no order was,
there could be no vicissitude of times: and yet this 'almost nothing,'
inasmuch as it was not altogether nothing, was from Him certainly, from
Whom is whatsoever is, in what degree soever it is." "This also," say
they, "do we not deny."

With these I now parley a little in Thy presence, O my God, who grant
all these things to be true, which Thy Truth whispers unto my soul. For
those who deny these things, let them bark and deafen themselves as much
as they please; I will essay to persuade them to quiet, and to open in
them a way for Thy word. But if they refuse, and repel me; I beseech, O
my God, be not Thou silent to me. Speak Thou truly in my heart; for
only Thou so speakest: and I will let them alone blowing upon the dust
without, and raising it up into their own eyes: and myself will enter
my chamber, and sing there a song of loves unto Thee; groaning with
groanings unutterable, in my wayfaring, and remembering Jerusalem, with
heart lifted up towards it, Jerusalem my country, Jerusalem my mother,
and Thyself that rulest over it, the Enlightener, Father, Guardian,
Husband, the pure and strong delight, and solid joy, and all good things
unspeakable, yea all at once, because the One Sovereign and true Good.
Nor will I be turned away, until Thou gather all that I am, from this
dispersed and disordered estate, into the peace of that our most dear
mother, where the first-fruits of my spirit be already (whence I am
ascertained of these things), and Thou conform and confirm it for ever,
O my God, my Mercy. But those who do not affirm all these truths to be
false, who honour Thy holy Scripture, set forth by holy Moses, placing
it, as we, on the summit of authority to be followed, and do yet
contradict me in some thing, I answer thus; By Thyself judge, O our God,
between my Confessions and these men's contradictions.

For they say, "Though these things be true, yet did not Moses intend
those two, when, by revelation of the Spirit, he said, In the beginning
God created heaven and earth. He did not under the name of heaven,
signify that spiritual or intellectual creature which always beholds the
face of God; nor under the name of earth, that formless matter." "What
then?" "That man of God," say they, "meant as we say, this declared he
by those words." "What?" "By the name of heaven and earth would he first
signify," say they, "universally and compendiously, all this visible
world; so as afterwards by the enumeration of the several days, to
arrange in detail, and, as it were, piece by piece, all those things,
which it pleased the Holy Ghost thus to enounce. For such were that
rude and carnal people to which he spake, that he thought them fit to be
entrusted with the knowledge of such works of God only as were visible."
They agree, however, that under the words earth invisible and without
form, and that darksome deep (out of which it is subsequently shown,
that all these visible things which we all know, were made and arranged
during those "days") may, not incongruously, be understood of this
formless first matter.

What now if another should say that "this same formlessness and
confusedness of matter, was for this reason first conveyed under the
name of heaven and earth, because out of it was this visible world with
all those natures which most manifestly appear in it, which is ofttimes
called by the name of heaven and earth, created and perfected?" What
again if another say that "invisible and visible nature is not indeed
inappropriately called heaven and earth; and so, that the universal
creation, which God made in His Wisdom, that is, in the Beginning, was
comprehended under those two words? Notwithstanding, since all things be
made not of the substance of God, but out of nothing (because they are
not the same that God is, and there is a mutable nature in them all,
whether they abide, as doth the eternal house of God, or be changed, as
the soul and body of man are): therefore the common matter of all things
visible and invisible (as yet unformed though capable of form), out of
which was to be created both heaven and earth (i.e., the invisible and
visible creature when formed), was entitled by the same names given to
the earth invisible and without form and the darkness upon the deep, but
with this distinction, that by the earth invisible and without form is
understood corporeal matter, antecedent to its being qualified by any
form; and by the darkness upon the deep, spiritual matter, before it
underwent any restraint of its unlimited fluidness, or received any
light from Wisdom?"

It yet remains for a man to say, if he will, that "the already perfected
and formed natures, visible and invisible, are not signified under the
name of heaven and earth, when we read, In the beginning God made heaven
and earth, but that the yet unformed commencement of things, the stuff
apt to receive form and making, was called by these names, because
therein were confusedly contained, not as yet distinguished by their
qualities and forms, all those things which being now digested into
order, are called Heaven and Earth, the one being the spiritual, the
other the corporeal, creation."

All which things being heard and well considered, I will not strive
about words: for that is profitable to nothing, but the subversion of
the hearers. But the law is good to edify, if a man use it lawfully: for
that the end of it is charity, out of a pure heart and good conscience,
and faith unfeigned. And well did our Master know, upon which two
commandments He hung all the Law and the Prophets. And what doth it
prejudice me, O my God, Thou light of my eyes in secret, zealously
confessing these things, since divers things may be understood under
these words which yet are all true,--what, I say, doth it prejudice me,
if I think otherwise than another thinketh the writer thought? All we
readers verily strive to trace out and to understand his meaning whom we
read; and seeing we believe him to speak truly, we dare not imagine
him to have said any thing, which ourselves either know or think to
be false. While every man endeavours then to understand in the Holy
Scriptures, the same as the writer understood, what hurt is it, if a man
understand what Thou, the light of all true-speaking minds, dost show
him to be true, although he whom he reads, understood not this, seeing
he also understood a Truth, though not this truth?

For true it is, O Lord, that Thou madest heaven and earth; and it is
true too, that the Beginning is Thy Wisdom, in Which Thou createst all:
and true again, that this visible world hath for its greater part
the heaven and the earth, which briefly comprise all made and created
natures. And true too, that whatsoever is mutable, gives us to
understand a certain want of form, whereby it receiveth a form, or is
changed, or turned. It is true, that that is subject to no times, which
so cleaveth to the unchangeable Form, as though subject to change,
never to be changed. It is true, that that formlessness which is almost
nothing, cannot be subject to the alteration of times. It is true, that
that whereof a thing is made, may by a certain mode of speech, be called
by the name of the thing made of it; whence that formlessness, whereof
heaven and earth were made, might be called heaven and earth. It is
true, that of things having form, there is not any nearer to having
no form, than the earth and the deep. It is true, that not only every
created and formed thing, but whatsoever is capable of being created and
formed, Thou madest, of Whom are all things. It is true, that whatsoever
is formed out of that which had no form, was unformed before it was
formed.

Out of these truths, of which they doubt not whose inward eye Thou hast
enabled to see such things, and who unshakenly believe Thy servant Moses
to have spoken in the Spirit of truth;--of all these then, he taketh
one, who saith, In the Beginning God made the heaven and the earth; that
is, "in His Word coeternal with Himself, God made the intelligible and
the sensible, or the spiritual and the corporeal creature." He another,
that saith, In the Beginning God made heaven and earth; that is, "in
His Word coeternal with Himself, did God make the universal bulk of this
corporeal world, together with all those apparent and known creatures,
which it containeth." He another, that saith, In the Beginning God made
heaven and earth; that is, "in His Word coeternal with Himself, did
God make the formless matter of creatures spiritual and corporeal." He
another, that saith, In the Beginning God created heaven and earth; that
is, "in His Word coeternal with Himself, did God create the formless
matter of the creature corporeal, wherein heaven and earth lay as yet
confused, which, being now distinguished and formed, we at this day see
in the bulk of this world." He another, who saith, In the Beginning God
made heaven and earth; that is, "in the very beginning of creating and
working, did God make that formless matter, confusedly containing in
itself both heaven and earth; out of which, being formed, do they now
stand out, and are apparent, with all that is in them."

And with regard to the understanding of the words following, out